History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
Cricket grew out of the many stick-and-ball games played in England 500 years ago, under a variety of different rules.
The word ‘bat’ is an old English word that simply means stick or club.
By the seventeenth century, cricket had evolved enough to be recognisable as a distinct game and it was popular enough for its fans to be fined for playing it on Sunday instead of going to church.
Till the middle of the eighteenth century, bats were roughly the same shape as hockey sticks, curving outwards at the bottom.
There was a simple reason for this: the ball was bowled underarm, along the ground and the curve at the end of the bat gave the batsman the best chance of making contact.
How that early version of cricket played in village England grew into the modern game played in giant stadiums in great cities is a proper subject for history because one of the uses of history is to understand how the present was made.
And sport is a large part of contemporary life: it is one way in which we amuse ourselves, compete with each other, stay fit, and express our social loyalties.
If tens of millions of Indians today drop everything to watch the Indian team play a Test match or a one-day international, it is reasonable for a history of India to explore how that stick-and-ball game invented in south-eastern England became the ruling passion of the Indian sub-continent.
This is particularly so, since the game was linked to the wider history of colonialism and nationalism and was in part shaped by the politics of religion and caste.
Our history of cricket will look first at the evolution of cricket as a game in England, and discuss the wider culture of physical training and athleticism of the time.
It will then move to India, discuss the history of the adoption of cricket in this country, and trace the modern transformation of the game.
In each of these sections we will see how the history of the game was connected to the social history of the time.
The Historical Development of Cricket as a Game in England
The social and economic history of England in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, cricket’s early years, shaped the game and gave cricket its unique nature.
For example, one of the peculiarities of Test cricket is that a match can go on for five days and still end in a draw.
No other modern team sport takes even half as much time to complete.
A football match is generally over in an hour-and-a-half of playing time.
Even baseball, a long-drawn-out bat-and-ball game by the standards of modern sport, completes nine innings in less than half the time that it takes to play a limited-overs match, the shortened version of modern cricket!
Another curious characteristic of cricket is that the length of the pitch is specified – 22 yards – but the size or shape of the ground is not.
Most other team sports, such as hockey and football lay down the dimensions of the playing area: cricket does not.
Grounds can be oval like the Adelaide Oval or nearly circular, like Chepauk in Chennai.
A six at the Melbourne Cricket Ground needs to clear much more ground than a lofted shot for the same reward at Feroz Shah Kotla in Delhi.
There’s a historical reason behind both these oddities.
Cricket was the earliest modern team sport to be codified, which is another way of saying that cricket gave itself rules and regulations so that it could be played in a uniform and standardised way well before team games like soccer and hockey.
The first written ‘Laws of Cricket’ were drawn up in 1744.
They stated, ‘the principals shall choose from amongst the gentlemen present two umpires who shall absolutely decide all disputes.
The stumps must be 22 inches high and the bail across them six inches.
The ball must be between 5 and 6 ounces, and the two sets of stumps 22 yards apart’.
There were no limits on the shape or size of the bat.
It appears that 40 notches or runs was viewed as a very big score, probably due to the bowlers bowling quickly at shins unprotected by pads.
The world’s first cricket club was formed in Hambledon in the 1760s and the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1787.
In 1788, the MCC published its first revision of the laws and became the guardian of cricket’s regulations.
The MCC’s revision of the laws brought in a series of changes in the game that occurred in the second half of the eighteenth century.
During the 1760s and 1770s it became common to pitch the ball through the air, rather than roll it along the ground.
This change gave bowlers the options of length, deception through the air, plus increased pace.
It also opened new possibilities for spin and swing.
In response, batsmen had to master timing and shot selection.
One immediate result was the replacement of the curved bat with the straight one.
All of this raised the premium on skill and reduced the influence of rough ground and brute force.
The weight of the ball was limited to between 51⁄2 to 53⁄4 ounces, and the width of the bat to four inches.
The latter ruling followed an innings by a batsman who appeared with a bat as wide as the wicket!
In 1774, the first leg-before law was published.
Also around this time, a third stump became common.
By 1780, three days had become the length of a major match, and this year also saw the creation of the first six-seam cricket ball.
While many important changes occurred during the nineteenth century (the rule about wide balls was applied, the exact circumference of the ball was specified, protective equipment like pads and gloves became available, boundaries were introduced where previously all shots had to be run and, most importantly, over- arm bowling became legal) cricket remained a pre-industrial sport that matured during the early phase of the Industrial Revolution, the late eighteenth century.
This history has made cricket a game with characteristics of both the past and the present day.
Cricket’s connection with a rural past can be seen in the length of a Test match.
Originally, cricket matches had no time limit.
The game went on for as long as it took to bowl out a side twice.
The rhythms of village life were slower and cricket’s rules were made before the Industrial Revolution.
Modern factory work meant that people were paid by the hour or the day or the week: games that were codified after the industrial revolution, like football and hockey, were strictly time-limited to fit the routines of industrial city life.
In the same way, cricket’s vagueness about the size of a cricket ground is a result of its village origins.
Cricket was originally played on country commons, unfenced land that was public property.
The size of the commons varied from one village to another, so there were no designated boundaries or boundary hits.
When the ball went into the crowd, the crowd cleared a way for the fieldsman to retrieve it.
Even after boundaries were written into the laws of cricket, their distance from the wicket was not specified.
The laws simply lay down that ‘the umpire shall agree with both captains on the boundaries of the playing area’.
If you look at the game’s equipment, you can see how cricket both changed with changing times and yet fundamentally remained true to its origins in rural England.
Cricket’s most important tools are all made of natural, pre-industrial materials.
The bat is made of wood as are the stumps and the bails.
The ball is made with leather, twine and cork.
Even today both bat and ball are handmade, not industrially manufactured.
The material of the bat changed slightly over time.
Once it was cut out of a single piece of wood.
Now it consists of two pieces, the blade which is made out of the wood of the willow tree and the handle which is made out of cane that became available as European colonialists and trading companies established themselves in Asia.
Unlike golf and tennis, cricket has refused to remake its tools with industrial or man-made materials: plastic, fibre glass and metal have been firmly rejected.
Australian cricketer Dennis Lillee tried to play an innings with an aluminium bat, only to have it outlawed by the umpires.
But in the matter of protective equipment, cricket has been influenced by technological change.
The invention of vulcanised rubber led to the introduction of pads in 1848 and protective gloves soon afterwards, and the modern game would be unimaginable without helmets made out of metal and synthetic lightweight materials.
Cricket and Victorian England
The organisation of cricket in England reflected the nature of English society.
The rich who could afford to play it for pleasure were called amateurs and the poor who played it for a living were called professionals.
The rich were amateurs for two reasons.
One, they considered sport a kind of leisure.
To play for the pleasure of playing and not for money was an aristocratic value.
Two, there was not enough money in the game for the rich to be interested.
The wages of professionals were paid by patronage or subscription or gate money.
The game was seasonal and did not offer employment the year round.
Most professionals worked as miners or in other forms of working class employment in winter, the off-season.
The social superiority of amateurs was built into the customs of cricket.
Amateurs were called Gentlemen while professionals had to be content with being described as Players.
They even entered the ground from different entrances.
Amateurs tended to be batsmen, leaving the energetic, hardworking aspects of the game, like fast bowling, to the professionals.
That is partly why the laws of the game always give the benefit of the doubt to the batsman.
Cricket is a batsman’s game because its rules were made to favour ‘Gentlemen’, who did most of the batting.
The social superiority of the amateur was also the reason the captain of a cricket team was traditionally a batsman: not because batsmen were naturally better captains but because they were generally Gentlemen.
Captains of teams, whether club teams or national sides, were always amateurs.
It was not till the 1930s that the English Test team was led by a professional, the Yorkshire batsman, Len Hutton.
It’s often said that the ‘battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton’.
This means that Britain’s military success was based on the values taught to schoolboys in its public schools.
Eton was the most famous of these schools.
The English boarding school was the institution that trained English boys for careers in the military, the civil service and the church, the three great institutions of imperial England.
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, men like Thomas Arnold, headmaster of the famous Rugby School and founder of the modern public school system, saw team sport like cricket and rugby not just as outdoor play, but as an organised way of teaching English boys the discipline, the importance of hierarchy, the skills, the codes of honour and the leadership qualities that helped them build and run the British empire.
Victorian empire builders justified the conquest of other countries as an act of unselfish social service, by which backward peoples were introduced to the civilising influence of British law and Western knowledge.
Cricket helped to confirm this self-image of the English elite by glorifying the amateur ideal, where cricket was played not for victory or profit, but for its own sake, in the spirit of fair play.
In actual fact the Napoleonic wars were won because of the economic contribution of the iron works of Scotland and Wales, the mills of Lancashire and the financial houses of the City of London.
It was the English lead in trade and industry that made Britain the world’s greatest power, but it suited the English ruling class to believe that it was the superior character of its young men, built in boarding schools, playing gentlemanly games like cricket, that tipped the balance.
The Spread of Cricket
While some English team games like hockey and football became international games, played all over the world, cricket remained a colonial game, limited to countries that had once been part of the British empire.
The pre-industrial oddness of cricket made it a hard game to export.
It took root only in countries that the British conquered and ruled.
In these colonies, cricket was established as a popular sport either by white settlers (as in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Australia, New Zealand, the West Indies and Kenya) or by local elites who wanted to copy the habits of their colonial masters, as in India.
While British imperial officials brought the game to the colonies, they made little effort to spread the game, especially in colonial territories where the subjects of empire were mainly non-white, such as India and the West Indies.
Here, playing cricket became a sign of superior social and racial status, and the Afro-Caribbean population was discouraged from participating in organised club cricket, which remained dominated by white plantation owners and their servants.
The first non-white club in the West Indies was established towards the end of the nineteenth century, and even in this case its members were light-skinned mulattos.
So while black people played an enormous amount of informal cricket on beaches, in back alleys and parks, club cricket till as late as the 1930s was dominated by white elites.
Despite the exclusiveness of the white cricket elite in the West Indies, the game became hugely popular in the Caribbean.
Success at cricket became a measure of racial equality and political progress.
At the time of their independence many of the political leaders of Caribbean countries like Forbes Burnham and Eric Williams saw in the game a chance for self- respect and international standing.
When the West Indies won its first Test series against England in 1950, it was celebrated as a national achievement, as a way of demonstrating that West Indians were the equals of white Englishmen.
There were two ironies to this great victory.
One, the West Indian team that won was captained by a white player.
The first time a black player led the West Indies Test team was in 1960 when Frank Worrell was named captain.
And two, the West Indies cricket team represented not one nation but several dominions that later became independent countries.
The pan-West Indian team that represents the Caribbean region in international Test cricket is the only exception to a series of unsuccessful efforts to bring about West Indian unification.
Cricket fans know that watching a match involves taking sides.
In a Ranji Trophy match when Delhi plays Mumbai, the loyalty of spectators depends on which city they come from or support.
When India plays Australia, the spectators watching the match on television in Bhopal or Chennai feel involved as Indians – they are moved by nationalist loyalties.
But through the early history of Indian first- class cricket, teams were not organised on geographical principles and it was not till 1932 that a national team was given the right to represent India in a Test match.
So how were teams organised and, in the absence of regional or national teams, how did cricket fans choose sides?
We turn to history for answers, to discover how cricket in India developed and to get a sense of the loyalties that united and divided Indians in the days of the Raj.
Cricket, Race and Religion
Cricket in colonial India was organised on the principle of race and religion.
The first record we have of cricket being played in India is from 1721, an account of recreational cricket played by English sailors in Cambay.
The first Indian club, the Calcutta Cricket Club, was established in 1792.
Through the eighteenth century, cricket in India was almost wholly a sport played by British military men and civil servants in all-white clubs and gymkhanas.
Playing cricket in the privacy of these clubs was more than just fun: it was also an escape from the strangeness, discomfort and danger of their stay in India.
Indians were considered to have no talent for the game and certainly not meant to play it.
But they did.
The origins of Indian cricket, that is, cricket played by Indians are to be found in Bombay and the first Indian community to start playing the game was the small community of Zoroastrians, the Parsis.
Brought into close contact with the British because of their interest in trade and the first Indian community to westernise, the Parsis founded the first Indian cricket club, the Oriental Cricket Club in Bombay in 1848.
Parsi clubs were funded and sponsored by Parsi businessmen like the Tatas and the Wadias.
The white cricket elite in India offered no help to the enthusiastic Parsis.
In fact, there was a quarrel between the Bombay Gymkhana, a whites-only club, and Parsi cricketers over the use of a public park.
The Parsis complained that the park was left unfit for cricket because the polo ponies of the Bombay Gymkhana dug up the surface.
When it became clear that the colonial authorities were prejudiced in favour of their white compatriots, the Parsis built their own gymkhana to play cricket in.
The rivalry between the Parsis and the racist Bombay Gymkhana had a happy ending for these pioneers of Indian cricket.
A Parsi team beat the Bombay Gymkhana at cricket in 1889, just four years after the foundation of the Indian National Congress in 1885, an organisation that was lucky to have amongst its early leaders the great Parsi statesman and intellectual Dadabhai Naoroji.
The establishment of the Parsi Gymkhana became a precedent for other Indians who in turn established clubs based on the idea of religious community.
By the 1890s, Hindus and Muslims were busy gathering funds and support for a Hindu Gymkhana and an Islam Gymkhana.
The British did not consider colonial India as a nation.
They saw it as a collection of castes and races and religious communities and gave themselves the credit for unifying the sub- continent.
In the late nineteenth century, many Indian institutions and movements were organised around the idea of religious community because the colonial state encouraged these divisions and was quick to recognise communal institutions.
For example, the Governor of the Bombay Presidency while dealing with an application from the Islam Gymkhana for land on Bombay’s seafront wrote: ‘... we can be certain that in a short time we shall get a similar application from some Hindu Gymkhana ...
I don’t see how we are to refuse these applicants; but I will ... refuse any more grants once a Gymkhana has been established ... by each nationality’.
(emphasis added).
It is obvious from this letter that colonial officials regarded religious communities as separate nationalities.
Applications that used the communal categories favoured by the colonial state were, as this letter shows, more likely to be approved.
This history of gymkhana cricket led to first-class cricket being organised on communal and racial lines.
The teams that played colonial India’s greatest and most famous first-class cricket tournament did not represent regions, as teams in today’s Ranji Trophy currently do, but religious communities.
The tournament was initially called the Quadrangular, because it was played by four teams: the Europeans, the Parsis, the Hindus and the Muslims.
It later became the Pentangular when a fifth team was added, namely, the Rest, which comprised all the communities left over, such as the Indian Christians.
For example, Vijay Hazare, a Christian, played for the Rest.
By the late 1930s and early 1940s, journalists, cricketers and political leaders had begun to criticize the racial and communal foundations of the Pentangular tournament.
The distinguished editor of the newspaper the Bombay Chronicle, S.A. Brelvi, the famous radio commentator A.F.S.
Talyarkhan and India’s most respected political figure, Mahatma Gandhi, condemned the Pentangular as a communally divisive competition that was out of place in a time when nationalists were trying to unite India’s diverse population.
A rival first-class tournament on regional lines, the National Cricket Championship (later named the Ranji Trophy), was established but not until Independence did it properly replace the Pentangular.
The colonial state and its divisive conception of India was the rock on which the Pentangular was built.
It was a colonial tournament and it died with the Raj.
The Modern Transformation of the Game
Modern cricket is dominated by Tests and one-day internationals, played between national teams.
The players who become famous, who live on in the memories of cricket’s public, are those who have played for their country.
The players Indian fans remember from the era of the Pentangular and the Quadrangular are those who were fortunate enough to play Test cricket.
C.K.
Nayudu, an outstanding Indian batsman of his time, lives on in the popular imagination when some of his great contemporaries like Palwankar Vithal and Palwankar Baloo have been forgotten because his career lasted long enough for him to play Test cricket for India while theirs did not.
Even though Nayudu was past his cricketing prime when he played for India in its first Test matches against England starting in 1932, his place in India’s cricket history is assured because he was the country’s first Test captain.
India entered the world of Test cricket in 1932, a decade and a half before it became an independent nation.
This was possible because Test cricket from its origins in 1877 was organised as a contest between different parts of the British empire, not sovereign nations.
The first Test was played between England and Australia when Australia was still a white settler colony, not even a self-governing dominion.
Similarly, the small countries of the Caribbean that together make up the West Indies team were British colonies till well after the Second World War.
Decolonisation and Sport
Decolonisation, or the process through which different parts of European empires became independent nations, began with the independence of India in 1947 and continued for the next half a century.
This process led to the decline of British influence in trade, commerce, military affairs, international politics and, inevitably, sporting matters.
But this did not happen at once; it took a while for the relative unimportance of post- imperial Britain to be reflected in the organisation of world cricket.
Even after Indian independence kick-started the disappearance of the British empire, the regulation of international cricket remained the business of the Imperial Cricket Conference ICC.
The ICC, renamed the International Cricket Conference as late as 1965, was dominated by its foundation members, England and Australia, which retained the right of veto over its proceedings.
Not till 1989 was the privileged position of England and Australia scrapped in favour of equal membership.
The colonial flavour of world cricket during the 1950s and 1960s can be seen from the fact that England and the other white commonwealth countries, Australia and New Zealand, continued to play Test cricket with South Africa, a racist state that practised a policy of racial segregation which, among other things, barred non-whites (who made up the majority of South Africa’s population) from representing that country in Test matches.
Test-playing nations like India, Pakistan and the West Indies boycotted South Africa, but they did not have the necessary power in the ICC to debar that country from Test cricket.
That only came to pass when the political pressure to isolate South Africa applied by the newly decolonised nations of Asia and Africa combined with liberal feeling in Britain and forced the English cricket authorities to cancel a tour by South Africa in 1970.
Commerce, Media and Cricket Today
The 1970s were the decade in which cricket was transformed: it was a time when a traditional game evolved to fit a changing world.
If 1970 was notable for the exclusion of South Africa from international cricket, 1971 was a landmark year because the first one-day international was played between England and Australia in Melbourne.
The enormous popularity of this shortened version of the game led to the first World Cup being successfully staged in 1975.
Then in 1977, even as cricket celebrated 100 years of Test matches, the game was changed forever, not by a player or cricket administrator, but by a businessman.
Kerry Packer, an Australian television tycoon who saw the money- making potential of cricket as a televised sport, signed up fifty-one of the world’s leading cricketers against the wishes of the national cricket boards and for about two years staged unofficial Tests and One-Day internationals under the name of World Series Cricket.
While Packer’s ‘circus’ as it was then described folded up after two years, the innovations he introduced during this time to make cricket more attractive to television audiences endured and changed the nature of the game.
Coloured dress, protective helmets, field restrictions, cricket under lights, became a standard part of the post-Packer game.
Crucially, Packer drove home the lesson that cricket was a marketable game, which could generate huge revenues.
Cricket boards became rich by selling television rights to television companies.
Television channels made money by selling television spots to companies who were happy to pay large sums of money to air commercials for their products to cricket’s captive television audience.
Continuous television coverage made cricketers celebrities who, besides being paid better by their cricket boards, now made even larger sums of money by making commercials for a wide range of products, from tyres to colas, on television.
Television coverage changed cricket.
It expanded the audience for the game by beaming cricket into small towns and villages.
It also broadened cricket’s social base.
Children who had never previously had the chance to watch international cricket because they lived outside the big cities, where top-level cricket was played, could now watch and learn by imitating their heroes.
The technology of satellite television and the world wide reach of multi-national television companies created a global market for cricket.
Matches in Sydney could now be watched live in Surat.
This simple fact shifted the balance of power in cricket: a process that had been begun by the break-up of the British Empire was taken to its logical conclusion by globalisation.
Since India had the largest viewership for the game amongst the cricket-playing nations and the largest market in the cricketing world, the game’s centre of gravity shifted to South Asia.
This shift was symbolized by the shifting of the ICC headquarters from London to tax-free Dubai.
A more important sign that the centre of gravity in cricket has shifted away from the old, Anglo-Australian axis is that innovations in cricket technique in recent years have mainly come from the practice of sub- continental teams in countries like India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Pakistan has pioneered two great advances in bowling: the doosra and the ‘reverse swing’.
Both skills were developed in response to sub- continental conditions: the doosra to counter aggressive batsmen with heavy modern bats who were threatening to make finger-spin obsolete and ‘reverse swing’ to move the ball in on dusty, unresponsive wickets under clear skies.
Initially, both innovations were greeted with great suspicion by countries like Britain and Australia which saw them as an underhanded, illegal bending of the laws of cricket.
In time, it came to be accepted that the laws of cricket could not continue to be framed for British or Australian conditions of play, and they became part of the technique of all bowlers, everywhere in the world.
One hundred and fifty years ago the first Indian cricketers, the Parsis, had to struggle to find an open space to play in.
Today, the global marketplace has made Indian players the best-paid, most famous cricketers in the game, men for whom the world is a stage.
The history that brought about this transformation was made up of many smaller changes: the replacement of the gentlemanly amateur by the paid professional, the triumph of the one-day game as it overshadowed Test cricket in terms of popularity, and the remarkable changes in global commerce and technology.
The business of history is to make sense of change over time.
In this chapter we have followed the spread of a colonial sport through its history, and tried to understand how it adapted to a post-colonial world.
On the morning of 14 July 1789, the city of Paris was in a state of alarm.
The king had commanded troops to move into the city.
Rumours spread that he would soon order the army to open fire upon the citizens.
Some 7,000 men and women gathered in front of the town hall and decided to form a peoples’ militia.
They broke into a number of government buildings in search of arms.
Finally, a group of several hundred people marched towards the eastern part of the city and stormed the fortress-prison, the Bastille, where they hoped to find hoarded ammunition.
In the armed fight that followed, the commander of the Bastille was killed and the prisoners released – though there were only seven of them.
Yet the Bastille was hated by all, because it stood for the despotic power of the king.
The fortress was demolished and its stone fragments were sold in the markets to all those who wished to keep a souvenir of its destruction.
The days that followed saw more rioting both in Paris and the countryside.
Most people were protesting against the high price of bread.
Much later, when historians looked back upon this time, they saw it as the beginning of a chain of events that ultimately led to the execution of the king in France, though most people at the time did not anticipate this outcome.
How and why did this happen?French Society During the Late Eighteenth Century
In 1774, Louis XVI of the Bourbon family of kings ascended the throne of France.
He was 20 years old and married to the Austrian princess Marie Antoinette.
Upon his accession the new king found an empty treasury.
Long years of war had drained the financial resources of France.
Added to this was the cost of maintaining an extravagant court at the immense palace of Versailles.
Under Louis XVI, France helped the thirteen American colonies to gain their independence from the common enemy, Britain.
The war added more than a billion livres to a debt that had already risen to more than 2 billion livres.
Lenders who gave the state credit, now began to charge 10 per cent interest on loans.
So the French government was obliged to spend an increasing percentage of its budget on interest payments alone.
To meet its regular expenses, such as the cost of maintaining an army, the court, running government offices or universities, the state was forced to increase taxes.
Yet even this measure would not have sufficed.
French society in the eighteenth century was divided into three estates, and only members of the third estate paid taxes.
The society of estates was part of the feudal system that dated back to the middle ages.
The term Old Regime is usually used to describe the society and institutions of France before 1789.
Fig.
2 shows how the system of estates in French society was organised.
Peasants made up about 90 per cent of the population.
However, only a small number of them owned the land they cultivated.
About 60 per cent of the land was owned by nobles, the Church and other richer members of the third estate.
The members of the first two estates, that is, the clergy and the nobility, enjoyed certain privileges by birth.
The most important of these was exemption from paying taxes to the state.
The nobles further enjoyed feudal privileges.
These included feudal dues, which they extracted from the peasants.
Peasants were obliged to render services to the lord – to work in his house and fields – to serve in the army or to participate in building roads.
The Church too extracted its share of taxes called tithes from the peasants, and finally, all members of the third estate had to pay taxes to the state.
These included a direct tax, called taille, and a number of indirect taxes which were levied on articles of everyday consumption like salt or tobacco.
The burden of financing activities of the state through taxes was borne by the third estate alone.
The Struggle to Survive
The population of France rose from about 23 million in 1715 to 28 million in 1789.
This led to a rapid increase in the demand for foodgrains.
Production of grains could not keep pace with the demand.
So the price of bread which was the staple diet of the majority rose rapidly.
Most workers were employed as labourers in workshops whose owner fixed their wages.
But wages did not keep pace with the rise in prices.
So the gap between the poor and the rich widened.
Things became worse whenever drought or hail reduced the harvest.
This led to a subsistence crisis, something that occurred frequently in France during the Old Regime.
A Growing Middle Class Envisages an End to Privileges
In the past, peasants and workers had participated in revolts against increasing taxes and food scarcity.
But they lacked the means and programmes to carry out full-scale measures that would bring about a change in the social and economic order.
This was left to those groups within the third estate who had become prosperous and had access to education and new ideas.
The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups, termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the richer members of society.
In addition to merchants and manufacturers, the third estate included professions such as lawyers or administrative officials.
All of these were educated and believed that no group in society should be privileged by birth.
Rather, a person’s social position must depend on his merit.
These ideas envisaging a society based on freedom and equal laws and opportunities for all, were put forward by philosophers such as John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau.
In his Two Treatises of Government, Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right of the monarch.
Rousseau carried the idea forward, proposing a form of government based on a social contract between people and their representatives.
In The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu proposed a division of power within the government between the legislative, the executive and the judiciary.
This model of government was put into force in the USA, after the thirteen colonies declared their independence from Britain.
The American constitution and its guarantee of individual rights was an important example for political thinkers in France.
The ideas of these philosophers were discussed intensively in salons and coffee-houses and spread among people through books and newspapers.
These were frequently read aloud in groups for the benefit of those who could not read and write.
The news that Louis XVI planned to impose further taxes to be able to meet the expenses of the state generated anger and protest against the system of privileges.
Accounts of lived experiences in the Old Regime
1.
Georges Danton, who later became active in revolutionary politics, wrote to a friend in 1793, looking back upon the time when he had just completed his studies: ‘I was educated in the residential college of Plessis.
There I was in the company of important men ... Once my studies ended, I was left with nothing.
I started looking for a post.
It was impossible to find one at the law courts in Paris.
The choice of a career in the army was not open to me as I was not a noble by birth, nor did I have a patron.
The church too could not offer me a refuge.
I could not buy an office as I did not possess a sou.
My old friends turned their backs to me ... the system had provided us with an education without however offering a field where our talents could be utilised.’
2.
An Englishman, Arthur Young, travelled thr ough France during the years from 1787 to 1789 and wrote detailed descriptions of his journeys.
He often commented on what he saw.
‘He who decides to be served and waited upon by slaves, ill-treated slaves at that, must be fully aware that by doing so he is placing his property and his life in a situation which is very different from that he would be in, had he chosen the services of free and well- treated men.
And he who chooses to dine to the accompaniment of his victims’ groans, should not complain i f during a riot his daughter gets kidnapped or his son’s throat is slit.’
The Outbreak of the Revolution
Louis XVI had to increase taxes for reasons you have learnt in the previous section.
How do you think he could have gone about doing this?
In France of the Old Regime the monarch did not have the power to impose taxes according to his will alone.
Rather he had to call a meeting of the Estates General which would then pass his proposals for new taxes.
The Estates General was a political body to which the three estates sent their representatives.
However, the monarch alone could decide when to call a meeting of this body.
The last time it was done was in 1614.
On 5 May 1789, Louis XVI called together an assembly of the Estates General to pass proposals for new taxes.
A resplendent hall in Versailles was prepared to host the delegates.
The first and second estates sent 300 representatives each, who were seated in rows facing each other on two sides, while the 600 members of the third estate had to stand at the back.
The third estate was represented by its more prosperous and educated members.
Peasants, artisans and women were denied entry to the assembly.
However, their grievances and demands were listed in some 40,000 letters which the representatives had brought with them.
Voting in the Estates General in the past had been conducted according to the principle that each estate had one vote.
This time too Louis XVI was determined to continue the same practice.
But members of the third estate demanded that voting now be conducted by the assembly as a whole, where each member would have one vote.
This was one of the democratic principles put forward by philosophers like Rousseau in his book The Social Contract.
When the king rejected this proposal, members of the third estate walked out of the assembly in protest.
The representatives of the third estate viewed themselves as spokesmen for the whole French nation.
On 20 June they assembled in the hall of an indoor tennis court in the grounds of Versailles.
They declared themselves a National Assembly and swore not to disperse till they had drafted a constitution for France that would limit the powers of the monarch.
They were led by Mirabeau and Abbé Sieyès.
Mirabeau was born in a noble family but was convinced of the need to do away with a society of feudal privilege.
He brought out a journal and delivered powerful speeches to the crowds assembled at Versailles.
Abbé Sieyès, originally a priest, wrote an influential pamphlet called ‘What is the Third Estate’?
While the National Assembly was busy at Versailles drafting a constitution, the rest of France seethed with turmoil.
A severe winter had meant a bad harvest; the price of bread rose, often bakers exploited the situation and hoarded supplies.
After spending hours in long queues at the bakery, crowds of angry women stormed into the shops.
At the same time, the king ordered troops to move into Paris.
On 14 July, the agitated crowd stormed and destroyed the Bastille.
In the countryside rumours spread from village to village that the lords of the manor had hired bands of brigands who were on their way to destroy the ripe crops.
Caught in a frenzy of fear, peasants in several districts seized hoes and pitchforks and attacked chateaux.
They looted hoarded grain and burnt down documents containing records of manorial dues.
A large number of nobles fled from their homes, many of them migrating to neighbouring countries.
Faced with the power of his revolting subjects, Louis XVI finally accorded recognition to the National Assembly and accepted the principle that his powers would from now on be checked by a constitution.
On the night of 4 August 1789, the Assembly passed a decree abolishing the feudal system of obligations and taxes.
Members of the clergy too were forced to give up their privileges.
Tithes were abolished and lands owned by the Church were confiscated.
As a result, the government acquired assets worth at least 2 billion livres.
France Becomes a Constitutional Monarchy
The National Assembly completed the draft of the constitution in 1791.
Its main object was to limit the powers of the monarch.
These powers instead of being concentrated in the hands of one person, were now separated and assigned to different institutions – the legislature, executive and judiciary.
This made France a constitutional monarchy.
Fig.
7 explains how the new political system worked.
The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the National Assembly, which was indirectly elected.
That is, citizens voted for a group of electors, who in turn chose the Assembly.
Not all citizens, however, had the right to vote.
Only men above 25 years of age who paid taxes equal to at least 3 days of a labourer’s wage were given the status of active citizens, that is, they were entitled to vote.
The remaining men and all women were classed as passive citizens.
To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly, a man had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers.
The Constitution began with a Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen.
Rights such as the right to life, freedom of speech, freedom of opinion, equality before law, were established as ‘natural and inalienable’ rights, that is, they belonged to each human being by birth and could not be taken away.
It was the duty of the state to protect each citizen’s natural rights.
The revolutionary journalist Jean-Paul Marat commented in his newspaper L’Ami du peuple ( The friend of the people) on the Constitution drafted by the National Assembly: ‘The task of representing the people has been given to the rich ... the lot of the poor and oppressed will never be improved by peaceful means alone.
Here we have absolute proof of how wealth influences the law.
Yet la ws wi ll last only as long as the people agree to obey them.
And when they have managed to cast off the yoke of the aristocrats, they will do the same to the other owners of wealth.’
The Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen
Men are born and remain free and equal in rights.
The aim of every political association is the preservation of the natural and inalienable rights of man; these are liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression.
The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation; no group or individual may exercise authority that does not come from the people.
Liberty consists of the power to do whatever is not injurious to others.
The law has the right to forbid only actions that are injurious to society.
Law is the expression of the general will.
All citizens have the right to participate in its formation, personally or through their representatives.
All citizens are equal before it.
No man may be accused, arrested or detained, except in cases determined by the law.
Every citizen may speak, write and print freely; he must take responsibility for the abuse of such liberty in cases determined by the law.
For the maintenance of the public force and for the expenses of administration a common tax is indispensable; it must be assessed equally on all citizens in proportion to their means.
Since pr operty is a sacred and inviolable right, no one may be deprived of it, unless a legally established public necessity requires it.
In that case a just compensation must be given in advance.
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years.
Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret negotiations with the King of Prussia.
Rulers of other neighbouring countries too were worried by the developments in France and made plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place there since the summer of 1789.
Before this could happen, the National Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria.
Thousands of volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army.
They saw this as a war of the people against kings and aristocracies all over Europe.
Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise, composed by the poet Roget de L’Isle.
It was sung for the first time by volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its name.
The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France.
The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties to the people.
While the men were away fighting at the front, women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and looking after their families.
Large sections of the population were convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections of society.
Political clubs became an important rallying point for people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their own forms of action.
The most successful of these clubs was that of the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St Jacob in Paris.
Women too, who had been active throughout this period, formed their own clubs.
Section 4 of this chapter will tell you more about their activities and demands.
The members of the Jacobin club belonged mainly to the less prosperous sections of society.
They included small shopkeepers, artisans such as shoemakers, pastry cooks, watch-makers, printers, as well as servants and daily-wage workers.
Their leader was Maximilian Robespierre.
A large group among the Jacobins decided to start wearing long striped trousers similar to those worn by dock workers.
This was to set themselves apart from the fashionable sections of society, especially nobles, who wore knee breeches.
It was a way of proclaiming the end of the power wielded by the wearers of knee breeches.
These Jacobins came to be known as the sans-culottes, literally meaning ‘those without knee breeches’.
Sans- culottes men wore in addition the red cap that symbolised liberty.
Women however were not allowed to do so.
In the summer of 1792 the Jacobins planned an insurrection of a large number of Parisians who were angered by the short supplies and high prices of food.
On the morning of August 10 they stormed the Palace of the Tuileries, massacred the king’s guards and held the king himself as hostage for several hours.
Later the Assembly voted to imprison the royal family.
Elections were held.
From now on all men of 21 years and above, regardless of wealth, got the right to vote.
The newly elected assembly was called the Convention.
On 21 September 1792 it abolished the monarchy and declared France a republic.
As you know, a republic is a form of government where the people elect the government including the head of the government.
There is no hereditary monarchy.
You can try and find out about some other countries that are republics and investigate when and how they became so.
Louis XVI was sentenced to death by a court on the charge of treason.
On 21 January 1793 he was executed publicly at the Place de la Concorde.
The queen Marie Antoinette met with the same fate shortly after.
The Reign of Terror
The period from 1793 to 1794 is referred to as the Reign of Terror.
Robespierre followed a policy of severe control and punishment.
All those whom he saw as being ‘enemies’ of the republic – ex-nobles and clergy, members of other political parties, even members of his own party who did not agree with his methods – were arrested, imprisoned and then tried by a revolutionary tribunal.
If the court found them ‘guilty’ they were guillotined.
The guillotine is a device consisting of two poles and a blade with which a person is beheaded.
It was named after Dr Guillotin who invented it.
Robespierre’s government issued laws placing a maximum ceiling on wages and prices.
Meat and bread were rationed.
Peasants were forced to transport their grain to the cities and sell it at prices fixed by the government.
The use of more expensive white flour was forbidden; all citizens were required to eat the pain d’égalité (equality bread), a loaf made of wholewheat.
Equality was also sought to be practised through forms of speech and address.
Instead of the traditional Monsieur (Sir) and Madame (Madam) all French men and women were henceforth Citoyen and Citoyenne (Citizen).
Churches were shut down and their buildings converted into barracks or offices.
Robespierre pursued his policies so relentlessly that even his supporters began to demand moderation.
Finally, he was convicted by a court in July 1794, arrested and on the next day sent to the guillotine.
What is liberty?
Two conflicting views:
The revolutionary journalist Camille Desmoulins wrote the following in 1793.
He was executed shortly after, during the Reign of Terror.
‘Some people believe that Liberty is like a child, which needs to go through a phase of being disciplined before it attains maturity.
Quite the opposite.
Liberty is Happiness, Reason, Equality, Justice, it is the Declaration of Rights ... You would like to finish off all your enemies by guillotining them.
Has anyone heard of something more senseless?
Would it be possible to bring a single person to the scaffold without making ten more enemies among his relations and friends?’
On 7 February 1794, Robespierre made a speech at the Convention, which was then carried by the newspaper Le Moniteur Universel.
Here is an extract from it:
‘To establish and consolidate democracy, to achieve the peaceful rule of constitutional laws, we must first finish the war of liberty against tyranny .... We must annihilate the enemies of the republic at home and abroad, or else we shall perish.
In time of Revolution a democratic go vernment ma y rely on terror.
Terror is nothing but justice, swi ft, sever e and inflexible; ... and is used to meet the most urgent needs of the fatherland.
To curb the enemies of Liberty through terror is the right of the founder of the Republic.’
A Directory Rules France
The fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle classes to seize power.
A new constitution was introduced which denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society.
It provided for two elected legislative councils.
These then appointed a Directory, an executive made up of five members.
This was meant as a safeguard against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under the Jacobins.
However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative councils, who then sought to dismiss them.
The political instability of the Directory paved the way for the rise of a military dictator, Napoleon Bonaparte.
Through all these changes in the form of government, the ideals of freedom, of equality before the law and of fraternity remained inspiring ideals that motivated political movements in France and the rest of Europe during the following century.
Did Women have a Revolution?
From the very beginning women were active participants in the events which brought about so many important changes in French society.
They hoped that their involvement would pressurise the revolutionary government to introduce measures to improve their lives.
Most women of the third estate had to work for a living.
They worked as seamstresses or laundresses, sold flowers, fruits and vegetables at the market, or were employed as domestic servants in the houses of prosperous people.
Most women did not have access to education or job training.
Only daughters of nobles or wealthier members of the third estate could study at a convent, after which their families arranged a marriage for them.
Working women had also to care for their families, that is, cook, fetch water, queue up for bread and look after the children.
Their wages were lower than those of men.
In order to discuss and voice their interests women started their own political clubs and newspapers.
About sixty women’s clubs came up in different French cities.
The Society of Revolutionary and Republican Women was the most famous of them.
One of their main demands was that women enjoy the same political rights as men.
Women were disappointed that the Constitution of 1791 reduced them to passive citizens.
They demanded the right to vote, to be elected to the Assembly and to hold political office.
Only then, they felt, would their interests be represented in the new government.
In the early years, the revolutionary government did introduce laws that helped improve the lives of women.
Together with the creation of state schools, schooling was made compulsory for all girls.
Their fathers could no longer force them into marriage against their will.
Marriage was made into a contract entered into freely and registered under civil law.
Divorce was made legal, and could be applied for by both women and men.
Women could now train for jobs, could become artists or run small businesses.
Women’s struggle for equal political rights, however, continued.
During the Reign of Terror, the new government issued laws ordering closure of women’s clubs and banning their political activities.
Many prominent women were arrested and a number of them executed.
Women’s movements for voting rights and equal wages continued through the next two hundred years in many countries of the world.
The fight for the vote was carried out through an international suffrage movement during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The example of the political activities of French women during the revolutionary years was kept alive as an inspiring memory.
It was finally in 1946 that women in France won the right to vote.
The Abolition of Slavery
One of the most revolutionary social reforms of the Jacobin regime was the abolition of slavery in the French colonies.
The colonies in the Caribbean – Martinique, Guadeloupe and San Domingo – were important suppliers of commodities such as tobacco, indigo, sugar and coffee.
But the reluctance of Europeans to go and work in distant and unfamiliar lands meant a shortage of labour on the plantations.
So this was met by a triangular slave trade between Europe, Africa and the Americas.
The slave trade began in the seventeenth century.
French merchants sailed from the ports of Bordeaux or Nantes to the African coast, where they bought slaves from local chieftains.
Branded and shackled, the slaves were packed tightly into ships for the three-month long voyage across the Atlantic to the Caribbean.
There they were sold to plantation owners.
The exploitation of slave labour made it possible to meet the growing demand in European markets for sugar, coffee, and indigo.
Port cities like Bordeaux and Nantes owed their economic prosperity to the flourishing slave trade.
Throughout the eighteenth century there was little criticism of slavery in France.
The National Assembly held long debates about whether the rights of man should be extended to all French subjects including those in the colonies.
But it did not pass any laws, fearing opposition from businessmen whose incomes depended on the slave trade.
It was finally the Convention which in 1794 legislated to free all slaves in the French overseas possessions.
This, however, turned out to be a short-term measure: ten years later, Napoleon reintroduced slavery.
Plantation owners understood their freedom as including the right to enslave African Negroes in pursuit of their economic interests.
Slavery was finally abolished in French colonies in 1848.
The Revolution and Everyday Life
Can politics change the clothes people wear, the language they speak or the books they read?
The years following 1789 in France saw many such changes in the lives of men, women and children.
The revolutionary governments took it upon themselves to pass laws that would translate the ideals of liberty and equality into everyday practice.
One important law that came into effect soon after the storming of the Bastille in the summer of 1789 was the abolition of censorship.
In the Old Regime all written material and cultural activities – books, newspapers, plays – could be published or performed only after they had been approved by the censors of the king.
Now the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen proclaimed freedom of speech and expression to be a natural right.
Newspapers, pamphlets, books and printed pictures flooded the towns of France from where they travelled rapidly into the countryside.
They all described and discussed the events and changes taking place in France.
Freedom of the press also meant that opposing views of events could be expressed.
Each side sought to convince the others of its position through the medium of print.
Plays, songs and festive processions attracted large numbers of people.
This was one way they could grasp and identify with ideas such as liberty or justice that political philosophers wrote about at length in texts which only a handful of educated people could read.
Conclusion
In 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself Emperor of France.
He set out to conquer neighbouring European countries, dispossessing dynasties and creating kingdoms where he placed members of his family.
Napoleon saw his role as a moderniser of Europe.
He introduced many laws such as the protection of private property and a uniform system of weights and measures provided by the decimal system.
Initially, many saw Napoleon as a liberator who would bring freedom for the people.
But soon the Napoleonic armies came to be viewed everywhere as an invading force.
He was finally defeated at Waterloo in 1815.
Many of his measures that carried the revolutionary ideas of liberty and modern laws to other parts of Europe had an impact on people long after Napoleon had left.
The ideas of liberty and democratic rights were the most important legacy of the French Revolution.
These spread from France to the rest of Europe during the nineteenth century, where feudal systems were abolished.
Colonised peoples reworked the idea of freedom from bondage into their movements to create a sovereign nation state.
Tipu Sultan and Rammohan Roy are two examples of individuals who responded to the ideas coming from revolutionary France.
The Pre-modern World
When we talk of ‘globalisation’ we often refer to an economic system that has emerged since the last 50 years or so.
But as you will see in this chapter, the making of the global world has a long history – of trade, of migration, of people in search of work, the movement of capital, and much else.
As we think about the dramatic and visible signs of global interconnectedness in our lives today, we need to understand the phases through which this world in which we live has emerged.
All through history, human societies have become steadily more interlinked.
From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and spiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution.
They carried goods, money, values, skills, ideas, inventions, and even germs and diseases.
As early as 3000 BCE an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley civilisations with present-day West Asia.
For more than a millennia, cowries (the Hindi cowdi or seashells, used as a form of currency) from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa.
The long-distance spread of disease-carrying germs may be traced as far back as the seventh century.
By the thirteenth century it had become an unmistakable link.
Silk Routes Link the World
The silk routes are a good example of vibrant pre-modern trade and cultural links between distant parts of the world.
The name ‘silk routes’ points to the importance of West-bound Chinese silk cargoes along this route.
Historians have identified several silk routes, over land and by sea, knitting together vast regions of Asia, and linking Asia with Europe and northern Africa.
They are known to have existed since before the Christian Era and thrived almost till the fifteenth century.
But Chinese pottery also travelled the same route, as did textiles and spices from India and Southeast Asia.
In return, precious metals – gold and silver – flowed from Europe to Asia.
Trade and cultural exchange always went hand in hand.
Early Christian missionaries almost certainly travelled this route to Asia, as did early Muslim preachers a few centuries later.
Much before all this, Buddhism emerged from eastern India and spread in several directions through intersecting points on the silk routes.
Food Travels: Spaghetti and Potato
Food offers many examples of long-distance cultural exchange.
Traders and travellers introduced new crops to the lands they travelled.
Even ‘ready’ foodstuff in distant parts of the world might share common origins.
Take spaghetti and noodles.
It is believed that noodles travelled west from China to become spaghetti.
Or, perhaps Arab traders took pasta to fifth-century Sicily, an island now in Italy.
Similar foods were also known in India and Japan, so the truth about their origins may never be known.
Yet such guesswork suggests the possibilities of long-distance cultural contact even in the pre-modern world.
Many of our common foods such as potatoes, soya, groundnuts, maize, tomatoes, chillies, sweet potatoes, and so on were not known to our ancestors until about five centuries ago.
These foods were only introduced in Europe and Asia after Christopher Columbus accidentally discovered the vast continent that would later become known as the Americas.
In fact, many of our common foods came from America’s original inhabitants – the American Indians.
Sometimes the new crops could make the difference between life and death.
Europe’s poor began to eat better and live longer with the introduction of the humble potato.
Ireland’s poorest peasants became so dependent on potatoes that when disease destroyed the potato crop in the mid-1840s, hundreds of thousands died of starvation.
Conquest, Disease and Trade
The pre-modern world shrank greatly in the sixteenth century after European sailors found a sea route to Asia and also successfully crossed the western ocean to America.
For centuries before, the Indian Ocean had known a bustling trade, with goods, people, knowledge, customs, etc.
criss-crossing its waters.
The Indian subcontinent was central to these flows and a crucial point in their networks.
The entry of the Europeans helped expand or redirect some of these flows towards Europe.
Before its ‘discovery’, America had been cut off from regular contact with the rest of the world for millions of years.
But from the sixteenth century, its vast lands and abundant crops and minerals began to transform trade and lives everywhere.
Precious metals, particularly silver, from mines located in present- day Peru and Mexico also enhanced Europe’s wealth and financed its trade with Asia.
Legends spread in seventeenth-century Europe about South America’s fabled wealth.
Many expeditions set off in search of El Dorado, the fabled city of gold.
The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of America was decisively under way by the mid-sixteenth century.
European conquest was not just a result of superior firepower.
In fact, the most powerful weapon of the Spanish conquerors was not a conventional military weapon at all.
It was the germs such as those of smallpox that they carried on their person.
Because of their long isolation, America’s original inhabitants had no immunity against these diseases that came from Europe.
Smallpox in particular proved a deadly killer.
Once introduced, it spread deep into the continent, ahead even of any Europeans reaching there.
It killed and decimated whole communities, paving the way for conquest.
Guns could be bought or captured and turned against the invaders.
But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were mostly immune.
Until the nineteenth century, poverty and hunger were common in Europe.
Cities were crowded and deadly diseases were widespread.
Religious conflicts were common, and religious dissenters were persecuted.
Thousands therefore fled Europe for America.
Here, by the eighteenth century, plantations worked by slaves captured in Africa were growing cotton and sugar for European markets.
Until well into the eighteenth century, China and India were among the world’s richest countries.
They were also pre-eminent in Asian trade.
However, from the fifteenth century, China is said to have restricted overseas contacts and retreated into isolation.
China’s reduced role and the rising importance of the Americas gradually moved the centre of world trade westwards.
Europe now emerged as the centre of world trade.
The Nineteenth Century (1815-1914
)The world changed profoundly in the nineteenth century.
Economic, political, social, cultural and technological factors interacted in complex ways to transform societies and reshape external relations.
Economists identify three types of movement or ‘flows’ within international economic exchanges.
The first is the flow of trade which in the nineteenth century referred largely to trade in goods (e.g., cloth or wheat).
The second is the flow of labour – the migration of people in search of employment.
The third is the movement of capital for short-term or long-term investments over long distances.
All three flows were closely interwoven and affected peoples’ lives more deeply now than ever before.
The interconnections could sometimes be broken – for example, labour migration was often more restricted than goods or capital flows.
Yet it helps us understand the nineteenth-century world economy better if we look at the three flows together.
A World Economy Takes Shape
A good place to start is the changing pattern of food production and consumption in industrial Europe.
Traditionally, countries liked to be self-sufficient in food.
But in nineteenth-century Britain, self-sufficiency in food meant lower living standards and social conflict.
Why was this so?
Population growth from the late eighteenth century had increased the demand for food grains in Britain.
As urban centres expanded and industry grew, the demand for agricultural products went up, pushing up food grain prices.
Under pressure from landed groups, the government also restricted the import of corn.
The laws allowing the government to do this were commonly known as the ‘Corn Laws’.
Unhappy with high food prices, industrialists and urban dwellers forced the abolition of the Corn Laws.
After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported into Britain more cheaply than it could be produced within the country.
British agriculture was unable to compete with imports.
Vast areas of land were now left uncultivated, and thousands of men and women were thrown out of work.
They flocked to the cities or migrated overseas.
As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose.
From the mid- nineteenth century, faster industrial growth in Britain also led to higher incomes, and therefore more food imports.
Around the world – in Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia – lands were cleared and food production expanded to meet the British demand.
It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture.
Railways were needed to link the agricultural regions to the ports.
New harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the new cargoes.
People had to settle on the lands to bring them under cultivation.
This meant building homes and settlements.
All these activities in turn required capital and labour.
Capital flowed from financial centres such as London.
The demand for labour in places where labour was in short supply – as in America and Australia – led to more migration.
Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America and Australia in the nineteenth century.
All over the world some 150 million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and vast distances over land in search of a better future.
Thus by 1890, a global agricultural economy had taken shape, accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns, capital flows, ecologies and technology.
Food no longer came from a nearby village or town, but from thousands of miles away.
It was not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large farm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest.
It was transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean.
Some of this dramatic change, though on a smaller scale, occurred closer home in west Punjab.
Here the British Indian government built a network of irrigation canals to transform semi-desert wastes into fertile agricultural lands that could grow wheat and cotton for export.
The Canal Colonies, as the areas irrigated by the new canals were called, were settled by peasants from other parts of Punjab.
Of course, food is merely an example.
A similar story can be told for cotton, the cultivation of which expanded worldwide to feed British textile mills.
Or rubber.
Indeed, so rapidly did regional specialisation in the production of commodities develop, that between 1820 and 1914 world trade is estimated to have multiplied 25 to 40 times.
Nearly 60 per cent of this trade comprised ‘primary products’ – that is, agricultural products such as wheat and cotton, and minerals such as coal.
Role of Technology
What was the role of technology in all this?
The railways, steamships, the telegraph, for example, were important inventions without which we cannot imagine the transformed nineteenth-century world.
But technological advances were often the result of larger social, political and economic factors.
For example, colonisation stimulated new investments and improvements in transport: faster railways, lighter wagons and larger ships helped move food more cheaply and quickly from faraway farms to final markets.
The trade in meat offers a good example of this connected process.
Till the 1870s, animals were shipped live from America to Europe and then slaughtered when they arrived there.
But live animals took up a lot of ship space.
Many also died in voyage, fell ill, lost weight, or became unfit to eat.
Meat was hence an expensive luxury beyond the reach of the European poor.
High prices in turn kept demand and production down until the development of a new technology, namely, refrigerated ships, which enabled the transport of perishable foods over long distances.
Now animals were slaughtered for food at the starting point – in America, Australia or New Zealand – and then transported to Europe as frozen meat.
This reduced shipping costs and lowered meat prices in Europe.
The poor in Europe could now consume a more varied diet.
To the earlier monotony of bread and potatoes many, though not all, could now add meat (and butter and eggs) to their diet.
Better living conditions promoted social peace within the country and support for imperialism abroad.
Late nineteenth-century Colonialism
Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth century.
But this was not only a period of expanding trade and increased prosperity.
It is important to realise that there was a darker side to this process.
In many parts of the world, the expansion of trade and a closer relationship with the world economy also meant a loss of freedoms and livelihoods.
Late- nineteenth-century European conquests produced many painful economic, social and ecological changes through which the colonised societies were brought into the world economy.
Look at a map of Africa (Fig.
10).
You will see some countries’ borders run straight, as if they were drawn using a ruler.
Well, in fact this was almost how rival European powers in Africa drew up the borders demarcating their respective territories.
In 1885 the big European powers met in Berlin to complete the carving up of Africa between them.
Britain and France made vast additions to their overseas territories in the late nineteenth century.
Belgium and Germany became new colonial powers.
The US also became a colonial power in the late 1890s by taking over some colonies earlier held by Spain.
Rinderpest, or the Cattle Plague In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast-spreading disease of cattle plague or rinderpest had a terrifying impact on people’s livelihoods and the local economy.
This is a good example of the widespread European imperial impact on colonised societies.
It shows how in this era of conquest even a disease affecting cattle reshaped the lives and fortunes of thousands of people and their relations with the rest of the world.
Historically, Africa had abundant land and a relatively small population.
For centuries, land and livestock sustained African livelihoods and people rarely worked for a wage.
In late- nineteenth-century Africa there were few consumer goods that wages could buy.
If you had been an African possessing land and livestock – and there was plenty of both – you too would have seen little reason to work for a wage.
In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to Africa due to its vast resources of land and minerals.
Europeans came to Africa hoping to establish plantations and mines to produce crops and minerals for export to Europe.
But there was an unexpected problem – a shortage of labour willing to work for wages.
Employers used many methods to recruit and retain labour.
Heavy taxes were imposed which could be paid only by working for wages on plantations and mines.
Inheritance laws were changed so that peasants were displaced from land: only one member of a family was allowed to inherit land, as a result of which the others were pushed into the labour market.
Mineworkers were also confined in compounds and not allowed to move about freely.
Then came rinderpest, a devastating cattle disease.
Rinderpest arrived in Africa in the late 1880s.
It was carried by infected cattle imported from British Asia to feed the Italian soldiers invading Eritrea in East Africa.
Entering Africa in the east, rinderpest moved west ‘like forest fire’, reaching Africa’s Atlantic coast in 1892.
It reached the Cape (Africa’s southernmost tip) five years later.
Along the way rinderpest killed 90 per cent of the cattle.
The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods.
Planters, mine owners and colonial governments now successfully monopolised what scarce cattle resources remained, to strengthen their power and to force Africans into the labour market.
Control over the scarce resource of cattle enabled European colonisers to conquer and subdue Africa.
Similar stories can be told about the impact of Western conquest on other parts of the nineteenth-century world.
Indentured Labour Migration from India
The example of indentured labour migration from India also illustrates the two-sided nature of the nineteenth-century world.
It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery, higher incomes for some and poverty for others, technological advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others.
In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and Chinese labourers went to work on plantations, in mines, and in road and railway construction projects around the world.
In India, indentured labourers were hired under contracts which promised return travel to India after they had worked five years on their employer’s plantation.
Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regions of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts of Tamil Nadu.
In the mid-nineteenth century these regions experienced many changes – cottage industries declined, land rents rose, lands were cleared for mines and plantations.
All this affected the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents, became deeply indebted and were forced to migrate in search of work.
The main destinations of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji.
Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and Malaya.
Indentured workers were also recruited for tea plantations in Assam.
Recruitment was done by agents engaged by employers and paid a small commission.
Many migrants agreed to take up work hoping to escape poverty or oppression in their home villages.
Agents also tempted the prospective migrants by providing false information about final destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the work, and living and working conditions.
Often migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long sea voyage.
Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less willing migrants.
Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a ‘new system of slavery’.
On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions to be different from what they had imagined.
Living and working conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights.
But workers discovered their own ways of surviving.
Many of them escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment.
Others developed new forms of individual and collective self- expression, blending different cultural forms, old and new.
In Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a riotous carnival called ‘Hosay’ (for Imam Hussain) in which workers of all races and religions joined.
Similarly, the protest religion of Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star Bob Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian migrants to the Caribbean.
‘Chutney music’, popular in Trinidad and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the post-indenture experience.
These forms of cultural fusion are part of the making of the global world, where things from different places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become something entirely new.
Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, or returned to their new homes after a short spell in India.
Consequently, there are large communities of people of Indian descent in these countries.
Have you heard of the Nobel Prize-winning writer V.S.
Naipaul?
Some of you may have followed the exploits of West Indies cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh Sarwan.
If you have wondered why their names sound vaguely Indian, the answer is that they are descended from indentured labour migrants from India.
From the 1900s India’s nationalist leaders began opposing the system of indentured labour migration as abusive and cruel.
It was abolished in 1921.
Yet for a number of decades afterwards, descendants of Indian indentured workers, often thought of as ‘coolies’, remained an uneasy minority in the Caribbean islands.
Some of Naipaul’s early novels capture their sense of loss and alienation.
Indian Entrepreneurs Abroad
Growing food and other crops for the world market required capital.
Large plantations could borrow it from banks and markets.
But what about the humble peasant?
Enter the Indian banker.
Do you know of the Shikaripuri shroffs and Nattukottai Chettiars?
They were amongst the many groups of bankers and traders who financed export agriculture in Central and Southeast Asia, using either their own funds or those borrowed from European banks.
They had a sophisticated system to transfer money over large distances, and even developed indigenous forms of corporate organisation.
Indian traders and moneylenders also followed European colonisers into Africa.
Hyderabadi Sindhi traders, however, ventured beyond European colonies.
From the 1860s they established flourishing emporia at busy ports worldwide, selling local and imported curios to tourists whose numbers were beginning to swell, thanks to the development of safe and comfortable passenger vessels.
Indian Trade, Colonialism and the Global System
Historically, fine cottons produced in India were exported to Europe.
With industrialisation, British cotton manufacture began to expand, and industrialists pressurised the government to restrict cotton imports and protect local industries.
Tariffs were imposed on cloth imports into Britain.
Consequently, the inflow of fine Indian cotton began to decline.
From the early nineteenth century, British manufacturers also began to seek overseas markets for their cloth.
Excluded from the British market by tariff barriers, Indian textiles now faced stiff competition in other international markets.
If we look at the figures of exports from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles: from some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815.
By the 1870s this proportion had dropped to below 3 per cent.
What, then, did India export?
The figures again tell a dramatic story.
While exports of manufactures declined rapidly, export of raw materials increased equally fast.
Between 1812 and 1871, the share of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent.
Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export for many decades.
And, as you have read last year, opium shipments to China grew rapidly from the 1820s to become for a while India’s single largest export.
Britain grew opium in India and exported it to China and, with the money earned through this sale, it financed its tea and other imports from China.
Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian market.
Food grain and raw material exports from India to Britain and the rest of the world increased.
But the value of British exports to India was much higher than the value of British imports from India.
Thus Britain had a ‘trade surplus’ with India.
Britain used this surplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries – that is, with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was selling to.
This is how a multilateral settlement system works – it allows one country’s deficit with another country to be settled by its surplus with a third country.
By helping Britain balance its deficits, India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century world economy.
Britain’s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‘home charges’ that included private remittances home by British officials and traders, interest payments on India’s external debt, and pensions of British officials in India.
The Inter-war Economy
The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought in Europe.
But its impact was felt around the world.
Notably for our concerns in this chapter, it plunged the first half of the twentieth century into a crisis that took over three decades to overcome.
During this period the world experienced widespread economic and political instability, and another catastrophic war.
Wartime Transformations
The First World War, as you know, was fought between two power blocs.
On the one side were the Allies – Britain, France and Russia (later joined by the US); and on the opposite side were the Central Powers – Germany, Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey.
When the war began in August 1914, many governments thought it would be over by Christmas.
It lasted more than four years.
The First World War was a war like no other before.
The fighting involved the world’s leading industrial nations which now harnessed the vast powers of modern industry to inflict the greatest possible destruction on their enemies.
This war was thus the first modern industrial war.
It saw the use of machine guns, tanks, aircraft, chemical weapons, etc.
on a massive scale.
These were all increasingly products of modern large- scale industry.
To fight the war, millions of soldiers had to be recruited from around the world and moved to the frontlines on large ships and trains.
The scale of death and destruction – 9 million dead and 20 million injured – was unthinkable before the industrial age, without the use of industrial arms.
Most of the killed and maimed were men of working age.
These deaths and injuries reduced the able-bodied workforce in Europe.
With fewer numbers within the family, household incomes declined after the war.
During the war, industries were restructured to produce war-related goods.
Entire societies were also reorganised for war – as men went to battle, women stepped in to undertake jobs that earlier only men were expected to do.
The war led to the snapping of economic links between some of the world’s largest economic powers which were now fighting each other to pay for them.
So Britain borrowed large sums of money from US banks as well as the US public.
Thus the war transformed the US from being an international debtor to an international creditor.
In other words, at the war’s end, the US and its citizens owned more overseas assets than foreign governments and citizens owned in the US.
Post-war Recovery
Post-war economic recovery proved difficult.
Britain, which was the world’s leading economy in the pre-war period, in particular faced a prolonged crisis.
While Britain was preoccupied with war, industries had developed in India and Japan.
After the war Britain found it difficult to recapture its earlier position of dominance in the Indian market, and to compete with Japan internationally.
Moreover, to finance war expenditures Britain had borrowed liberally from the US.
This meant that at the end of the war Britain was burdened with huge external debts.
The war had led to an economic boom, that is, to a large increase in demand, production and employment.
When the war boom ended, production contracted and unemployment increased.
At the same time the government reduced bloated war expenditures to bring them into line with peacetime revenues.
These developments led to huge job losses – in 1921 one in every five British workers was out of work.
Indeed, anxiety and uncertainty about work became an enduring part of the post-war scenario.
Many agricultural economies were also in crisis.
Consider the case of wheat producers.
Before the war, eastern Europe was a major supplier of wheat in the world market.
When this supply was disrupted during the war, wheat production in Canada, America and Australia expanded dramatically.
But once the war was over, production in eastern Europe revived and created a glut in wheat output.
Grain prices fell, rural incomes declined, and farmers fell deeper into debt.
Rise of Mass Production and Consumption
In the US, recovery was quicker.
We have already seen how the war helped boost the US economy.
After a short period of economic trouble in the years after the war, the US economy resumed its strong growth in the early 1920s.
One important feature of the US economy of the 1920s was mass production.
The move towards mass production had begun in the late nineteenth century, but in the 1920s it became a characteristic feature of industrial production in the US.
A well-known pioneer of mass production was the car manufacturer Henry Ford.
He adapted the assembly line of a Chicago slaughterhouse (in which slaughtered animals were picked apart by butchers as they came down a conveyor belt) to his new car plant in Detroit.
He realised that the ‘assembly line’ method would allow a faster and cheaper way of producing vehicles.
The assembly line forced workers to repeat a single task mechanically and continuously – such as fitting a particular part to the car – at a pace dictated by the conveyor belt.
This was a way of increasing the output per worker by speeding up the pace of work.
Standing in front of a conveyor belt no worker could afford to delay the motions, take a break, or even have a friendly word with a workmate.
As a result, Henry Ford’s cars came off the assembly line at three-minute intervals, a speed much faster than that achieved by previous methods.
The T- Model Ford was the world’s first mass-produced car.
At first workers at the Ford factory were unable to cope with the stress of working on assembly lines in which they could not control the pace of work.
So they quit in large numbers.
In desperation Ford doubled the daily wage to $5 in January 1914.
At the same time he banned trade unions from operating in his plants.
Henry Ford recovered the high wage by repeatedly speeding up the production line and forcing workers to work ever harder.
So much so, he would soon describe his decision to double the daily wage as the ‘best cost-cutting decision’ he had ever made.
Fordist industrial practices soon spread in the US.
They were also widely copied in Europe in the 1920s.
Mass production lowered costs and prices of engineered goods.
Thanks to higher wages, more workers could now afford to purchase durable consumer goods such as cars.
Car production in the US rose from 2 million in 1919 to more than 5 million in 1929.
Similarly, there was a spurt in the purchase of refrigerators, washing machines, radios, gramophone players, all through a system of ‘hire purchase’ (i.e., on credit repaid in weekly or monthly instalments).
The demand for refrigerators, washing machines, etc.
was also fuelled by a boom in house construction and home ownership, financed once again by loans.
The housing and consumer boom of the 1920s created the basis of prosperity in the US.
Large investments in housing and household goods seemed to create a cycle of higher employment and incomes, rising consumption demand, more investment, and yet more employment and incomes.
In 1923, the US resumed exporting capital to the rest of the world and became the largest overseas lender.
US imports and capital exports also boosted European recovery and world trade and income growth over the next six years.
All this, however, proved too good to last.
By 1929 the world would be plunged into a depression such as it had never experienced before.
The Great Depression
The Great Depression began around 1929 and lasted till the mid- 1930s.
During this period most parts of the world experienced catastrophic declines in production, employment, incomes and trade.
The exact timing and impact of the depression varied across countries.
But in general, agricultural regions and communities were the worst affected.
This was because the fall in agricultural prices was greater and more prolonged than that in the prices of industrial goods.
The depression was caused by a combination of several factors.
We have already seen how fragile the post-war world economy was.
First: agricultural overproduction remained a problem.
This was made worse by falling agricultural prices.
As prices slumped and agricultural incomes declined, farmers tried to expand production and bring a larger volume of produce to the market to maintain their overall income.
This worsened the glut in the market, pushing down prices even further.
Farm produce rotted for a lack of buyers.
Second: in the mid-1920s, many countries financed their investments through loans from the US.
While it was often extremely easy to raise loans in the US when the going was good, US overseas lenders panicked at the first sign of trouble.
In the first half of 1928, US overseas loans amounted to over $ 1 billion.
A year later it was one quarter of that amount.
Countries that depended crucially on US loans now faced an acute crisis.
The withdrawal of US loans affected much of the rest of the world, though in different ways.
In Europe it led to the failure of some major banks and the collapse of currencies such as the British pound sterling.
In Latin America and elsewhere it intensified the slump in agricultural and raw material prices.
The US attempt to protect its economy in the depression by doubling import duties also dealt another severe blow to world trade.
The US was also the industrial country most severely affected by the depression.
With the fall in prices and the prospect of a depression, US banks had also slashed domestic lending and called back loans.
Farms could not sell their harvests, households were ruined, and businesses collapsed.
Faced with falling incomes, many households in the US could not repay what they had borrowed, and were forced to give up their homes, cars and other consumer durables.
The consumerist prosperity of the 1920s now disappeared in a puff of dust.
As unemployment soared, people trudged long distances looking for any work they could find.
Ultimately, the US banking system itself collapsed.
Unable to recover investments, collect loans and repay depositors, thousands of banks went bankrupt and were forced to close.
The numbers are phenomenal: by 1933 over 4,000 banks had closed and between 1929 and 1932 about 110, 000 companies had collapsed.
By 1935, a modest economic recovery was under way in most industrial countries.
But the Great Depression’s wider effects on society, politics and international relations, and on peoples’ minds, proved more enduring.
India and the Great Depression
If we look at the impact of the depression on India we realise how integrated the global economy had become by the early twentieth century.
The tremors of a crisis in one part of the world were quickly relayed to other parts, affecting lives, economies and societies worldwide.
In the nineteenth century, as you have seen, colonial India had become an exporter of agricultural goods and importer of manufactures.
The depression immediately affected Indian trade.
India’s exports and imports nearly halved between 1928 and 1934.
As international prices crashed, prices in India also plunged.
Between 1928 and 1934, wheat prices in India fell by 50 per cent.
Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban dwellers.
Though agricultural prices fell sharply, the colonial government refused to reduce revenue demands.
Peasants producing for the world market were the worst hit.
Consider the jute producers of Bengal.
They grew raw jute that was processed in factories for export in the form of gunny bags.
But as gunny exports collapsed, the price of raw jute crashed more than 60 per cent.
Peasants who borrowed in the hope of better times or to increase output in the hope of higher incomes faced ever lower prices, and fell deeper and deeper into debt.
Across India, peasants’ indebtedness increased.
They used up their savings, mortgaged lands, and sold whatever jewellery and precious metals they had to meet their expenses.
In these depression years, India became an exporter of precious metals, notably gold.
The famous economist John Maynard Keynes thought that Indian gold exports promoted global economic recovery.
They certainly helped speed up Britain’s recovery, but did little for the Indian peasant.
Rural India was thus seething with unrest when Mahatma Gandhi launched the civil disobedience movement at the height of the depression in 1931.
The depression proved less grim for urban India.
Because of falling prices, those with fixed incomes – say town-dwelling landowners who received rents and middle-class salaried employees – now found themselves better off.
Everything cost less.
Industrial investment also grew as the government extended tariff protection to industries, under the pressure of nationalist opinion.
Rebuilding a World Economy: The Post-war Era
The Second World War broke out a mere two decades after the end of the First World War.
It was fought between the Axis powers (mainly Nazi Germany, Japan and Italy) and the Allies (Britain, France, the Soviet Union and the US).
It was a war waged for six years on many fronts, in many places, over land, on sea, in the air.
Once again death and destruction was enormous.
At least 60 million people, or about 3 per cent of the world’s 1939 population, are believed to have been killed, directly or indirectly, as a result of the war.
Millions more were injured.
Unlike in earlier wars, most of these deaths took place outside the battlefields.
Many more civilians than soldiers died from war-related causes.
Vast parts of Europe and Asia were devastated, and several cities were destroyed by aerial bombardment or relentless artillery attacks.
The war caused an immense amount of economic devastation and social disruption.
Reconstruction promised to be long and difficult.
Two crucial influences shaped post-war reconstruction.
The first was the US’s emergence as the dominant economic, political and military power in the Western world.
The second was the dominance of the Soviet Union.
It had made huge sacrifices to defeat Nazi Germany, and transformed itself from a backward agricultural country into a world power during the very years when the capitalist world was trapped in the Great Depression.
Post-war Settlement and the Bretton Woods Institutions
Economists and politicians drew two key lessons from inter-war economic experiences.
First, an industrial society based on mass production cannot be sustained without mass consumption.
But to ensure mass consumption, there was a need for high and stable incomes.
Incomes could not be stable if employment was unstable.
Thus stable incomes also required steady, full employment.
But markets alone could not guarantee full employment.
Therefore governments would have to step in to minimise fluctuations of price, output and employment.
Economic stability could be ensured only through the intervention of the government.
The second lesson related to a country’s economic links with the outside world.
The goal of full employment could only be achieved if governments had power to control flows of goods, capital and labour.
Thus in brief, the main aim of the post-war international economic system was to preserve economic stability and full employment in the industrial world.
Its framework was agreed upon at the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference held in July 1944 at Bretton Woods in New Hampshire, USA.
The Bretton Woods conference established the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to deal with external surpluses and deficits of its member nations.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (popularly known as the World Bank) was set up to finance post- war reconstruction.
The IMF and the World Bank are referred to as the Bretton Woods institutions or sometimes the Bretton Woods twins.
The post-war international economic system is also often described as the Bretton Woods system.
The IMF and the World Bank commenced financial operations in 1947.
Decision-making in these institutions is controlled by the Western industrial powers.
The US has an effective right of veto over key IMF and World Bank decisions.
The international monetary system is the system linking national currencies and monetary system.
The Bretton Woods system was based on fixed exchange rates.
In this system, national currencies, for example the Indian rupee, were pegged to the dollar at a fixed exchange rate.
The dollar itself was anchored to gold at a fixed price of $35 per ounce of gold.
The Early Post-war Years
The Bretton Woods system inaugurated an era of unprecedented growth of trade and incomes for the Western industrial nations and Japan.
World trade grew annually at over 8 per cent between 1950 and 1970 and incomes at nearly 5 per cent.
The growth was also mostly stable, without large fluctuations.
For much of this period the unemployment rate, for example, averaged less than 5 per cent in most industrial countries.
These decades also saw the worldwide spread of technology and enterprise.
Developing countries were in a hurry to catch up with the advanced industrial countries.
Therefore, they invested vast amounts of capital, importing industrial plant and equipment featuring modern technology.
Decolonisation and Independence
When the Second World War ended, large parts of the world were still under European colonial rule.
Over the next two decades most colonies in Asia and Africa emerged as free, independent nations.
They were, however, overburdened by poverty and a lack of resources, and their economies and societies were handicapped by long periods of colonial rule.
The IMF and the World Bank were designed to meet the financial needs of the industrial countries.
They were not equipped to cope with the challenge of poverty and lack of development in the former colonies.
But as Europe and Japan rapidly rebuilt their economies, they grew less dependent on the IMF and the World Bank.
Thus from the late 1950s the Bretton Woods institutions began to shift their attention more towards developing countries.
As colonies, many of the less developed regions of the world had been part of Western empires.
Now, ironically, as newly independent countries facing urgent pressures to lift their populations out of poverty, they came under the guidance of international agencies dominated by the former colonial powers.
Even after many years of decolonisation, the former colonial powers still controlled vital resources such as minerals and land in many of their former colonies.
Large corporations of other powerful countries, for example the US, also often managed to secure rights to exploit developing countries’ natural resources very cheaply.
At the same time, most developing countries did not benefit from the fast growth the Western economies experienced in the 1950s and 1960s.
Therefore they organised themselves as a group – the Group of 77 (or G-77) – to demand a new international economic order (NIEO).
By the NIEO they meant a system that would give them real control over their natural resources, more development assistance, fairer prices for raw materials, and better access for their manufactured goods in developed countries’ markets.
End of Bretton Woods and the Beginning of ‘Globalisation’
Despite years of stable and rapid growth, not all was well in this post-war world.
From the 1960s the rising costs of its overseas involvements weakened the US’s finances and competitive strength.
The US dollar now no longer commanded confidence as the world’s principal currency.
It could not maintain its value in relation to gold.
This eventually led to the collapse of the system of fixed exchange rates and the introduction of a system of floating exchange rates.
From the mid-1970s the international financial system also changed in important ways.
Earlier, developing countries could turn to international institutions for loans and development assistance.
But now they were forced to borrow from Western commercial banks and private lending institutions.
This led to periodic debt crises in the developing world, and lower incomes and increased poverty, especially in Africa and Latin America.
The industrial world was also hit by unemployment that began rising from the mid-1970s and remained high until the early 1990s.
From the late 1970s MNCs also began to shift production operations to low-wage Asian countries.
China had been cut off from the post-war world economy since its revolution in 1949.
But new economic policies in China and the collapse of the Soviet Union and Soviet-style communism in Eastern Europe brought many countries back into the fold of the world economy.
Wages were relatively low in countries like China.
Thus they became attractive destinations for investment by foreign MNCs competing to capture world markets.
Have you noticed that most of the TVs, mobile phones, and toys we see in the shops seem to be made in China?
This is because of the low-cost structure of the Chinese economy, most importantly its low wages.
The relocation of industry to low-wage countries stimulated world trade and capital flows.
In the last two decades the world’s economic geography has been transformed as countries such as India, China and Brazil have undergone rapid economic transformation.
In the previous chapter you read about the rise of print culture and how new forms of communication reshaped the way people thought about themselves or related to each other.
You also saw how print culture created the possibility of new forms of literature.
In this chapter we will study the history of one such form – the novel – a history that is closely connected to the making of modern ways of thinking.
We will first look at the history of the novel in the West, and then see how this form developed in some of the regions of India.
As you will see, despite their differences, there were many commonalites of focus between novels written in different parts of the world.
The Rise of the Novel
The novel is a modern form of literature.
It is born from print, a mechanical invention.
We cannot think of the novel without the printed book.
In ancient times, as you have seen (Chapter 7), manuscripts were handwritten.
These circulated among very few people.
In contrast, because of being printed, novels were widely read and became popular very quickly.
At this time big cities like London were growing rapidly and becoming connected to small towns and rural areas through print and improved communications.
Novels produced a number of common interests among their scattered and varied readers.
As readers were drawn into the story and identified with the lives of fictitious characters, they could think about issues such as the relationship between love and marriage, the proper conduct for men and women, and so on.
The novel first took firm root in England and France.
Novels began to be written from the seventeenth century, but they really flowered from the eighteenth century.
New groups of lower-middle-class people such as shopkeepers and clerks, along with the traditional aristocratic and gentlemanly classes in England and France now formed the new readership for novels.
As readership grew and the market for books expanded, the earnings of authors increased.
This freed them from financial dependence on the patronage of aristocrats, and gave them independence to experiment with different literary styles.
Henry Fielding, a novelist of the early eighteenth century, claimed he was ‘the founder of a new province of writing’ where he could make his own laws.
The novel allowed flexibility in the form of writing.
Walter Scott remembered and collected popular Scottish ballads which he used in his historical novels about the wars between Scottish clans.
The epistolary novel, on the other hand, used the private and personal form of letters to tell its story.
Samuel Richardson’s Pamela, written in the eighteenth century, told much of its story through an exchange of letters between two lovers.
These letters tell the reader of the hidden conflicts in the heroine’s mind.
The Publishing Market
For a long time the publishing market excluded the poor.
Initially, novels did not come cheap.
Henry Fielding’s Tom Jones (1749) was issued in six volumes priced at three shillings each – which was more than what a labourer earned in a week.
But soon, people had easier access to books with the introduction of circulating libraries in 1740.
Technological improvements in printing brought down the price of books and innovations in marketing led to expanded sales.
In France, publishers found that they could make super profits by hiring out novels by the hour.
The novel was one of the first mass-produced items to be sold.
There were several reasons for its popularity.
The worlds created by novels were absorbing and believable, and seemingly real.
While reading novels, the reader was transported to another person’s world, and began looking at life as it was experienced by the characters of the novel.
Besides, novels allowed individuals the pleasure of reading in private, as well as the joy of publicly reading or discussing stories with friends or relatives.
In rural areas people would collect to hear one of them reading a novel aloud, often becoming deeply involved in the lives of the characters.
Apparently, a group at Slough in England were very pleased to hear that Pamela, the heroine of Richardson’s popular novel, had got married in their village.
They rushed out to the parish church and began to ring the church bells!
In 1836 a notable event took place when Charles Dickens’s Pickwick Papers was serialised in a magazine.
Magazines were attractive since they were illustrated and cheap.
Serialisation allowed readers to relish the suspense, discuss the characters of a novel and live for weeks with their stories – like viewers of television soaps today!
The World of the Novel
More than other forms of writing which came before, novels are about ordinary people.
They do not focus on the lives of great people or actions that change the destinies of states and empires.
Instead, they are about the everyday life of common people.
In the nineteenth century, Europe entered the industrial age.
Factories came up, business profits increased and the economy grew.
But at the same time, workers faced problems.
Cities expanded in an unregulated way and were filled with overworked and underpaid workers.
The unemployed poor roamed the streets for jobs, and the homeless were forced to seek shelter in workhouses.
The growth of industry was accompanied by an economic philosophy which celebrated the pursuit of profit and undervalued the lives of workers.
Deeply critical of these developments, novelists such as Charles Dickens wrote about the terrible effects of industrialisation on people’s lives and characters.
His novel Hard Times (1854) describes Coketown, a fictitious industrial town, as a grim place full of machinery, smoking chimneys, rivers polluted purple and buildings that all looked the same.
Here workers are known as ‘hands’, as if they had no identity other than as operators of machines.
Dickens criticised not just the greed for profits but also the ideas that reduced human beings into simple instruments of production.
In other novels too, Dickens focused on the terrible conditions of urban life under industrial capitalism.
His Oliver Twist (1838) is the tale of a poor orphan who lived in a world of petty criminals and beggars.
Brought up in a cruel workhouse (see Fig.
6), Oliver was finally adopted by a wealthy man and lived happily ever after.
But not all novels about the lives of the poor gave readers the comfort of a happy ending.
Emile Zola’s Germinal (1885) on the life of a young miner in France explores in harsh detail the grim conditions of miners’ lives.
It ends on a note of despair: the strike the hero leads fails, his co-workers turn against him, and hopes are shattered.
Community and Society
The vast majority of readers of the novel lived in the city.
The novel created in them a feeling of connection with the fate of rural communities.
The nineteenth-century British novelist Thomas Hardy, for instance, wrote about traditional rural communities of England that were fast vanishing.
This was actually a time when large farmers fenced off land, bought machines and employed labourers to produce for the market.
The old rural culture with its independent farmers was dying out.
We get a sense of this change in Hardy’s Mayor of Casterbridge (1886).
It is about Michael Henchard, a successful grain merchant, who becomes the mayor of the farming town of Casterbridge.
He is an independent-minded man who follows his own style in conducting business.
He can also be both unpredictably generous and cruel with his employees.
Consequently, he is no match for his manager and rival Donald Farfrae who runs his business on efficient managerial lines and is well regarded for he is smooth and even-tempered with everyone.
We can see that Hardy mourns the loss of the more personalised world that is disappearing, even as he is aware of its problems and the advantages of the new order.
The novel uses the vernacular, the language that is spoken by common people.
By coming closer to the different spoken languages of the people, the novel produces the sense of a shared world between diverse people in a nation.
Novels also draw from different styles of language.
A novel may take a classical language and combine it with the language of the streets and make them all a part of the vernacular that it uses.
Like the nation, the novel brings together many cultures.
The New Woman
The most exciting element of the novel was the involvement of women.
The eighteenth century saw the middle classes become more prosperous.
Women got more leisure to read as well as write novels.
And novels began exploring the world of women – their emotions and identities, their experiences and problems.
Many novels were about domestic life – a theme about which women were allowed to speak with authority.
They drew upon their experience, wrote about family life and earned public recognition.
The novels of Jane Austen give us a glimpse of the world of women in genteel rural society in early-nineteenth-century Britain.
They make us think about a society which encouraged women to look for ‘good’ marriages and find wealthy or propertied husbands.
The first sentence of Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice states: ‘It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.’ This observation allows us to see the behaviour of the main characters, who are preoccupied with marriage and money, as typifying Austen’s society.
But women novelists did not simply popularise the domestic role of women.
Often their novels dealt with women who broke established norms of society before adjusting to them.
Such stories allowed women readers to sympathise with rebellious actions.
In Charlotte Bronte’s Jane Eyre, published in 1847, young Jane is shown as independent and assertive.
While girls of her time were expected to be quiet and well behaved, Jane at the age of ten protests against the hypocrisy of her elders with startling bluntness.
She tells her Aunt who is always unkind to her: ‘People think you a good woman, but you are bad ... You are deceitful!
I will never call you aunt as long as I live.’
Novels for the Young
Novels for young boys idealised a new type of man: someone who was powerful, assertive, independent and daring.
Most of these novels were full of adventure set in places remote from Europe.
The colonisers appear heroic and honourable – confronting ‘native’ peoples and strange surroundings, adapting to native life as well as changing it, colonising territories and then developing nations there.
Books like R.L.
Stevenson’s Treasure Island (1883) or Rudyard Kipling’s Jungle Book (1894) became great hits.
G.A.
Henty’s historical adventure novels for boys were also wildly popular during the height of the British empire.
They aroused the excitement and adventure of conquering strange lands.
They were set in Mexico, Alexandria, Siberia and many other countries.
They were always about young boys who witness grand historical events, get involved in some military action and show what they called ‘English’ courage.
Love stories written for adolescent girls also first became popular in this period, especially in the US, notably Ramona (1884) by Helen Hunt Jackson and a series entitled What Katy Did (1872) by Sarah Chauncey Woolsey, who wrote under the pen-name Susan Coolidge.
Colonialism and After
The novel originated in Europe at a time when it was colonising the rest of the world.
The early novel contributed to colonialism by making the readers feel they were part of a superior community of fellow colonialists.
The hero of Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe (1719) is an adventurer and slave trader.
Shipwrecked on an island, Crusoe treats coloured people not as human beings equal to him, but as inferior creatures.
He rescues a ‘native’ and makes him his slave.
He does not ask for his name but arrogantly gives him the name Friday.
But at the time, Crusoe’s behaviour was not seen as unacceptable or odd, for most writers of the time saw colonialism as natural.
Colonised people were seen as primitive and barbaric, less than human; and colonial rule was considered necessary to civilise them, to make them fully human.
It was only later, in the twentieth century, that writers like Joseph Conrad (1857-1924) wrote novels that showed the darker side of colonial occupation.
The colonised, however, believed that the novel allowed them to explore their own identities and problems, their own national concerns.
Let us see how the novel became popular in India and what significance it had for society.
The Novel Comes to India Stories in prose were not new to India.
Banabhatta’s Kadambari, written in Sanskrit in the seventh century, is an early example.
The Panchatantra is another.
There was also a long tradition of prose tales of adventure and heroism in Persian and Urdu, known as dastan.
However, these works were not novels as we know them today.
The modern novel form developed in India in the nineteenth century, as Indians became familiar with the Western novel.
The development of the vernaculars, print and a reading public helped in this process.
Some of the earliest Indian novels were written in Bengali and Marathi.
The earliest novel in Marathi was Baba Padmanji’s Yamuna Paryatan (1857), which used a simple style of storytelling to speak about the plight of widows.
This was followed by Lakshman Moreshwar Halbe’s Muktamala (1861).
This was not a realistic novel; it presented an imaginary ‘romance’ narrative with a moral purpose.
Leading novelists of the nineteenth century wrote for a cause.
Colonial rulers regarded the contemporary culture of India as inferior.
On the other hand, Indian novelists wrote to develop a modern literature of the country that could produce a sense of national belonging and cultural equality with their colonial masters.
Translations of novels into different regional languages helped to spread the popularity of the novel and stimulated the growth of the novel in new areas.
The Novel in South India
Novels began appearing in south Indian languages during the period of colonial rule.
Quite a few early novels came out of attempts to translate English novels into Indian languages.
For example, O. Chandu Menon, a subjudge from Malabar, tried to translate an English novel called Henrietta Temple written by Benjamin Disraeli into Malayalam.
But he quickly realised that his readers in Kerala were not familiar with the way in which the characters in English novels lived: their clothes, ways of speaking, and manners were unknown to them.
They would find a direct translation of an English novel dreadfully boring.
So, he gave up this idea and wrote instead a story in Malayalam in the ‘manner of English novel books’.
This delightful novel called Indulekha, published in 1889, was the first modern novel in Malayalam.
The case of Andhra Pradesh was strikingly similar.
Kandukuri Viresalingam (1848-1919) began translating Oliver Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield into Telugu.
He abandoned this plan for similar reasons and instead wrote an original Telugu novel called Rajasekhara Caritamu in 1878.
The Novel in Hindi
In the north, Bharatendu Harishchandra, the pioneer of modern Hindi literature, encouraged many members of his circle of poets and writers to recreate and translate novels from other languages.
Many novels were actually translated and adapted from English and Bengali under his influence, but the first proper modern novel was written by Srinivas Das of Delhi.
Srinivas Das’s novel, published in 1882, was titled Pariksha-Guru (The Master Examiner).
It cautioned young men of well-to-do families against the dangerous influences of bad company and consequent loose morals.
Pariksha-Guru reflects the inner and outer world of the newly emerging middle classes.
The characters in the novel are caught in the difficulty of adapting to colonised society and at the same time preserving their own cultural identity.
The world of colonial modernity seems to be both frightening and irresistible to the characters.
The novel tries to teach the reader the ‘right way’ to live and expects all ‘sensible men’ to be worldly-wise and practical, to remain rooted in the values of their own tradition and culture, and to live with dignity and honour.
In the novel we see the characters attempting to bridge two different worlds through their actions: they take to new agricultural technology, modernise trading practices, change the use of Indian languages, making them capable of transmitting both Western sciences and Indian wisdom.
The young are urged to cultivate the ‘healthy habit’ of reading the newspapers.
But the novel emphasises that all this must be achieved without sacrificing the traditional values of the middle-class household.
With all its good intentions, Pariksha- Guru could not win many readers, as it was perhaps too moralising in its style.
It was with the writing of Premchand that the Hindi novel achieved excellence.
He began writing in Urdu and then shifted to Hindi, remaining an immensely influential writer in both languages.
He drew on the traditional art of kissa-goi (storytelling).
Many critics think that his novel Sewasadan (The Abode of Service), published in 1916, lifted the Hindi novel from the realm of fantasy, moralising and simple entertainment to a serious reflection on the lives of ordinary people and social issues.
Sewasadan deals mainly with the poor condition of women in society.
Issues like child marriage and dowry are woven into the story of the novel.
It also tells us about the ways in which the Indian upper classes used whatever little opportunities they got from colonial authorities to govern themselves.
Novels in Bengal In the nineteenth century, the early Bengali novels lived in two worlds.
Many of these novels were located in the past, their characters, events and love stories based on historical events.
Another group of novels depicted the inner world of domestic life in contemporary settings.
Domestic novels frequently dealt with the social problems and romantic relationships between men and women.
The old merchant elite of Calcutta patronised public forms of entertainment such as kabirlarai (poetry contests), musical soirees and dance performances.
In contrast, the new bhadralok found himself at home in the more private world of reading novels.
Novels were read individually.
They could also be read in select groups.
Sometimes the household of the great Bangla novelist Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay would host a jatra in the courtyard where members of the family would be gathered.
In Bankim’s room, however, a group of literary friends would collect to read, discuss and judge literary works.
Bankim read out Durgeshnandini (1865), his first novel, to such a gathering of people who were stunned to realise that the Bengali novel had achieved excellence so quickly.
Besides the ingenious twists and turns of the plot and the suspense, the novel was also relished for its language.
The prose style became a new object of enjoyment.
Initially the Bengali novel used a colloquial style associated with urban life.
It also used meyeli, the language associated with women’s speech.
This style was quickly replaced by Bankim’s prose which was Sanskritised but also contained a more vernacular style.
The novel rapidly acquired popularity in Bengal.
By the twentieth century, the power of telling stories in simple language made Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938) the most popular novelist in Bengal and probably in the rest of India.
Novels in the Colonial World
If we follow the history of the novel in different parts of India we can see many regional peculiarities.
But there were also recurring patterns and common concerns.
What inspired the authors to write novels?
Who read the novels?
How did the culture of reading develop?
How did the novels grapple with the problems of societal change within a colonial society?
What kind of a world did novels open up for the readers?
Let us explore some of these questions by focusing primarily on the writings of three authors from different regions: Chandu Menon, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay and Premchand.
Uses of the Novel
Indians used the novel as a powerful medium to criticise what they considered defects in their society and to suggest remedies.
Writers like Viresalingam used the novel mainly to propagate their ideas about society among a wider readership.
Novels also helped in establishing a relationship with the past.
Many of them told thrilling stories of adventures and intrigues set in the past.
Through glorified accounts of the past, these novels helped in creating a sense of national pride among their readers.
At the same time, people from all walks of life could read novels so long as they shared a common language.
This helped in creating a sense of collective belonging on the basis of one’s language.
You would have noticed that people living in different regions speak the same language in different ways – sometimes they use different words for the same thing; sometimes the same word is pronounced differently.
With the coming of novels, such variations entered the world of print for the first time.
The way characters spoke in a novel began to indicate their region, class or caste.
Thus novels made their readers familiar with the ways in which people in other parts of their land spoke their language.
The Problem of Being Modern
Although they were about imaginary stories, novels often spoke to their readers about the real world.
But novels did not always show things exactly as they were in reality.
Sometimes, they presented a vision of how things ought to be.
Social novelists often created heroes and heroines with ideal qualities, who their readers could admire and imitate.
How were these ideal qualities defined?
In many novels written during the colonial period, the ideal person successfully deals with one of the central dilemmas faced by colonial subjects: how to be modern without rejecting tradition, how to accept ideas coming from the West without losing one’s identity.
Chandu Menon portrayed Indulekha as a woman of breathtaking beauty, high intellectual abilities, artistic talent, and with an education in English and Sanskrit.
Madhavan, the hero of the novel, was also presented in ideal colours.
He was a member of the newly English-educated class of Nayars from the University of Madras.
He was also a ‘first-rate Sanskrit scholar’.
He dressed in Western clothes.
But, at the same time, he kept a long tuft of hair, according to the Nayar custom.
The heroes and heroines in most of the novels were people who lived in the modern world.
Thus they were different from the ideal or mythological characters of the earlier poetic literature of India.
Under colonial rule, many of the English-educated class found new Western ways of living and thinking attractive.
But they also feared that a wholesale adoption of Western values would destroy their traditional ways of living.
Characters like Indulekha and Madhavan showed readers how Indian and foreign lifestyles could be brought together in an ideal combination.
Pleasures of Reading As elsewhere in the world, in India too, the novel became a popular medium of entertainment among the middle class.
The circulation of printed books allowed people to amuse themselves in new ways.
Picture books, translations from other languages, popular songs sometimes composed on contemporary events, stories in newspapers and magazines – all these offered new forms of entertainment.
Within this new culture of print, novels soon became immensely popular.
In Tamil, for example, there was a flood of popular novels in the early decades of the twentieth century.
Detective and mystery novels often had to be printed again and again to meet the demand of readers: some of them were reprinted as many as twenty-two times!
The novel also assisted in the spread of silent reading.
We are so used to reading in silence that it is difficult for us to think that this practice was not very common in the past.
As late as the nineteenth century and perhaps even in the early twentieth century, written texts were often read aloud for several people to hear.
Sometimes novels were also read in this way, but in general novels encouraged reading alone and in silence.
Individuals sitting at home or travelling in trains enjoyed them.
Even in a crowded room, the novel offered a special world of imagination into which the reader could slip, and be all alone.
In this, reading a novel was like daydreaming.
Women and the Novel
Many people got worried about the effects of the novel on readers who were taken away from their real surroundings into an imaginary world where anything could happen.
Some of them wrote in newspapers and magazines, advising people to stay away from the immoral influence of novels.
Women and children were often singled out for such advice: they were seen as easily corruptible.
Some parents kept novels in the lofts in their houses, out of their children’s reach.
Young people often read them in secret.
This passion was not limited only to the youth.
Older women – some of whom could not read – listened with fascinated attention to popular Tamil novels read out to them by their grandchildren – a nice reversal of the familiar grandma’s tales!
But women did not remain mere readers of stories written by men; soon they also began to write novels.
In some languages, the early creations of women were poems, essays or autobiographical pieces.
In the early decades of the twentieth century, women in south India also began writing novels and short stories.
A reason for the popularity of novels among women was that it allowed  for a new conception of womanhood.
Stories of love – which reading.
choose or refuse their partners and relationships.
It showed  women who could to some extent control their lives.
Some women authors also wrote about women who changed the world of both men and women.
Rokeya Hossein (1880-1932) was a reformer who, after she was widowed, started a girl’s school in Calcutta.
She wrote a satiric fantasy in English called Sultana’s Dream (1905) which shows a topsy- turvy world in which women take the place of men.
Her n o v e l Padmarag also showed the need for women to reform their condition by their own actions.
It is not surprising that many men were suspicious of women writing novels or reading them.
This suspicion cut across communities.
Hannah Mullens, a Christian missionary and the author of Karuna o Phulmonir Bibaran (1852), reputedly the first novel in Bengali, tells her readers that she wrote in secret.
In the twentieth century, Sailabala Ghosh Jaya, a popular novelist, could only write because her husband protected her.
As we have seen in the case of the south, women and girls were often discouraged from reading novels.
Caste Practices, ‘Lower-Castes’ and Minorities
As you have seen, Indulekha was a love story.
But it was also about an issue that was hotly debated at the time when the novel was written.
This concerned the marriage practices of upper-caste Hindus in Kerala, especially the Nambuthiri Brahmins and the Nayars.
Nambuthiris were also major landlords in Kerala at that time; and a large section of the Nayars were their tenants.
In late-nineteenth- century Kerala, a younger generation of English-educated Nayar men who had acquired property and wealth on their own, began arguing strongly against Nambuthiri alliances with Nayar women.
They wanted new laws regarding marriage and property.
The story of Indulekha is interesting in the light of these debates.
Suri Nambuthiri, the foolish landlord who comes to marry Indulekha, is the focus of much satire in the novel.
The intelligent heroine rejects him and chooses Madhavan, the educated and handsome Nayar as her husband, and the young couple move to Madras, where Madhavan joins the civil service.
Suri Nambuthiri, desperate to find a partner for himself, finally marries a poorer relation from the same family and goes away pretending that he has married Indulekha!
Chandu Menon clearly wanted his readers to appreciate the new values of his hero and heroine and criticise the ignorance and immorality of Suri Nambuthiri.
Novels like Indirabai and Indulekha were written by members of the upper castes, and were primarily about upper-caste characters.
But not all novels were of this kind.
Potheri Kunjambu, a ‘lower-caste’ writer from north Kerala, wrote a novel called Saraswativijayam in 1892, mounting a strong attack on caste oppression.
This novel shows a young man from an ‘untouchable’ caste, leaving his village to escape the cruelty of his Brahmin landlord.
He converts to Christianity, obtains modern education, and returns as the judge in the local court.
Meanwhile, the villagers, thinking that the landlord’s men had killed him, file a case.
At the conclusion of the trial, the judge reveals his true identity, and the Nambuthiri repents and reforms his ways.
Saraswativijayam stresses the importance of education for the upliftment of the lower castes.
From the 1920s, in Bengal too a new kind of novel emerged that depicted the lives of peasants and ‘low’ castes.
Advaita Malla Burman’s (1914-51) Titash Ekti Nadir Naam (1956) is an epic about the Mallas, a community of fisherfolk who live off fishing in the river Titash.
The novel is about three generations of the Mallas, about their recurring tragedies and the story of Ananta, a child born of parents who were tragically separated after their wedding night.
Ananta leaves the community to get educated in the city.
The novel describes the community life of the Mallas in great detail, their Holi and Kali Puja festivals, boat races, bhatiali songs, their relationships of friendship and animosity with the peasants and the oppression of the upper castes.
Slowly the community breaks up and the Mallas start fighting amongst themselves as new cultural influences from the city start penetrating their lives.
The life of the community and that of the river is intimately tied.
Their end comes together: as the river dries up, the community dies too.
While novelists before Burman had featured ‘low’ castes as their protagonists, Titash is special because the author is himself from a ‘low-caste’, fisherfolk community.
Over time, the medium of the novel made room for the experiences of communities that had not received much space in the literary scene earlier.
Vaikkom Muhammad Basheer (1908-94), for example, was one of the early Muslim writers to gain wide renown as a novelist in Malayalam.
Basheer had little formal education.
Most of his works were based on his own rich personal experience rather than on books from the past.
When he was in class five at school, Basheer left home to take part in the Salt Satyagraha.
Later he spent years wandering in different parts of India and travelling even to Arabia, working in a ship, living with Sufis and Hindu sanyasis, and training as a wrestler.
Basheer’s short novels and stories were written in the ordinary language of conversation.
With wonderful humour, Basheer’s novels spoke about details from the everyday life of Muslim households.
He also brought into Malayalam writing themes which were considered very unusual at that time – poverty, insanity and life in prisons.
The Nation and its History
The history written by colonial historians tended to depict Indians as weak, divided, and dependent on the British.
These histories could not satisfy the tastes of the new Indian administrators and intellectuals.
Nor did the traditional Puranic stories of the past – peopled by gods and demons, filled with the fantastic and the supernatural – seem convincing to those educated and working under the English system.
Such minds wanted a new view of the past that would show that Indians could be independent minded and had been so in history.
The novel provided a solution.
In it, the nation could be imagined in a past that also featured historical characters, places, events and dates.
In Bengal, many historical novels were about Marathas and Rajputs.
These novels produced a sense of a pan-Indian belonging.
They imagined the nation to be full of adventure, heroism, romance and sacrifice – qualities that could not be found in the offices and streets of the nineteenth-century world.
The novel allowed the colonised to give shape to their desires.
Bhudeb Mukhopadhyay’s (1827-94) Anguriya Binimoy (1857) was the first historical novel written in Bengal.
Its hero Shivaji engages in many battles against a clever and treacherous Aurangzeb.
Man Singh persuades Shivaji to make peace with Aurangzeb.
Realising that Aurangzeb intended to confine him as a house prisoner, Shivaji escapes and returns to battle.
What gives him courage and tenacity is his belief that he is a nationalist fighting for the freedom of Hindus.
The imagined nation of the novel was so powerful that it could inspire actual political movements.
Bankim’s Anandamath (1882) is a novel about a secret Hindu militia that fights Muslims to establish a Hindu kingdom.
It was a novel that inspired many kinds of freedom fighters.
Many of these novels also reveal the problems of thinking about the nation.
Was India to be a nation of only a single religious community?
Who had natural claims to belong to the nation?
The Novel and Nation Making
Imagining a heroic past was one way in which the novel helped in popularising the sense of belonging to a common nation.
Another way was to include various classes in the novel so that they could be seen to belong to a shared world.
Premchand’s novels, for instance, are filled with all kinds of powerful characters drawn from all levels were historical; he later shifted to writing stories of society.
In his novels you meet aristocrats and landlords, middle- level peasants and landless labourers, middle-class professionals and people from the margins of society.
The women characters are strong individuals, especially those who come from the lower classes and are not modernised.
Unlike many of his contemporaries, the wife of Nikhilesh, a liberal landlord who Premchand rejected the nostalgic obsession with ancient history.
believes that he can save his country by patiently bettering the lives of its poor and marginal Instead, his novels look towards the future without forgetting the sections.
But Bimala is attracted to Sandip, her importance of the past.
Drawn from various strata of society, Premchand’s characters create a community based on democratic values.
The central character of his novel Rangbhoomi (The Arena), Surdas, is a visually impaired beggar from a so-called ‘untouchable’ caste.
The very act of choosing such a person as the ‘hero’ of a novel is significant.
It makes the lives of the most oppressed section of society as worthy of literary reflection.
We see Surdas struggling against the forcible takeover of his land for establishing a tobacco factory.
As we read the story we wonder about industrialisation and its impact on society and people.
Who does it serve?
Must other ways of living be sacrificed for it?
The story of Surdas was inspired by Gandhi’s personality and ideas.
Godan (The Gift of Cow), published in 1936, remains Premchand’s best-known work.
It is an epic of the Indian peasantry.
The novel tells the moving story of Hori and his wife Dhania, a peasant couple.
Landlords, moneylenders, priests and colonial bureaucrats – all those who hold power in society – form a network of oppression, rob their land and make them into landless labourers.
Yet Hori and Dhania retain their dignity to the end.
Conclusion We have seen how, over the course of its history in both the West and in India, the novel became part of the lives of different sections of people.
Developments in print technologies allowed the novel to break out of its small circle of readers and introduced fresh ways of reading.
But through their stories, novels have also shown a capacity to include and focus on the lives of those who were not often known to literate and middle-class circles.
We have seen some examples of these in Premchand, but they are equally present in the works of other novelists.
History
Bringing together people from varied backgrounds produces a sense of shared community.
The most notable form of this community is the nation.
Equally significant is the fact that by bringing in both the powerful and the marginal peoples and cultures, the novel throws up many questions about the nature of these communities.
We can say then that novels produce a sense of sharing, and promote an understanding of different people, different values and different communities.
At the same time they explore how different groups begin to question or reflect upon their own identities.
The Age of Social Change
In the previous chapter you read about the powerful ideas of freedom and equality that circulated in Europe after the French Revolution.
The French Revolution opened up the possibility of creating a dramatic change in the way in which society was structured.
As you have read, before the eighteenth century society was broadly divided into estates and orders and it was the aristocracy and church which controlled economic and social power.
Suddenly, after the revolution, it seemed possible to change this.
In many parts of the world including Europe and Asia, new ideas about individual rights and who controlled social power began to be discussed.
In India, Raja Rammohan Roy and Derozio talked of the significance of the French Revolution, and many others debated the ideas of post-revolutionary Europe.
The developments in the colonies, in turn, reshaped these ideas of societal change.
Not everyone in Europe, however, wanted a complete transformation of society.
Responses varied from those who accepted that some change was necessary but wished for a gradual shift, to those who wanted to restructure society radically.
Some were ‘conservatives’, others were ‘liberals’ or ‘radicals’.
What did these terms really mean in the context of the time?
What separated these strands of politics and what linked them together?
We must remember that these terms do not mean the same thing in all contexts or at all times.
We will look briefly at some of the important political traditions of the nineteenth century, and see how they influenced change.
Then we will focus on one historical event in which there was an attempt at a radical transformation of society.
Through the revolution in Russia, socialism became one of the most significant and powerful ideas to shape society in the twentieth century.
Liberals, Radicals and Conservatives
One of the groups which looked to change society were the liberals.
Liberals wanted a nation which tolerated all religions.
We should remember that at this time European states usually discriminated in favour of one religion or another (Britain favoured the Church of England, Austria and Spain favoured the Catholic Church).
Liberals also opposed the uncontrolled power of dynastic rulers.
They wanted to safeguard the rights of individuals against governments.
They argued for a representative, elected parliamentary government, subject to laws interpreted by a well-trained judiciary that was independent of rulers and officials.
However, they were not ‘democrats’.
They did not believe in universal adult franchise, that is, the right of every citizen to vote.
They felt men of property mainly should have the vote.
They also did not want the vote for women.
In contrast, radicals wanted a nation in which government was based on the majority of a country’s population.
Many supported women’s suffragette movements.
Unlike liberals, they opposed the privileges of great landowners and wealthy factory owners.
They were not against the existence of private property but disliked concentration of property in the hands of a few.
Conservatives were opposed to radicals and liberals.
After the French Revolution, however, even conservatives had opened their minds to the need for change.
Earlier, in the eighteenth century, conservatives had been generally opposed to the idea of change.
By the nineteenth century, they accepted that some change was inevitable but believed that the past had to be respected and change had to be brought about through a slow process.
Such differing ideas about societal change clashed during the social and political turmoil that followed the French Revolution.
The various attempts at revolution and national transformation in the nineteenth century helped define both the limits and potential of these political tendencies.
Industrial Society and Social Change
These political trends were signs of a new time.
It was a time of profound social and economic changes.
It was a time when new cities came up and new industrialised regions developed, railways expanded and the Industrial Revolution occurred.
Industrialisation brought men, women and children to factories.
Work hours were often long and wages were poor.
Unemployment was common, particularly during times of low demand for industrial goods.
Housing and sanitation were problems since towns were growing rapidly.
Liberals and radicals searched for solutions to these issues.
Almost all industries were the property of individuals.
Liberals and radicals themselves were often property owners and employers.
Having made their wealth through trade or industrial ventures, they felt that such effort should be encouraged – that its benefits would be achieved if the workforce in the economy was healthy and citizens were educated.
Opposed to the privileges the old aristocracy had by birth, they firmly believed in the value of individual effort, labour and enterprise.
If freedom of individuals was ensured, if the poor could labour, and those with capital could operate without restraint, they believed that societies would develop.
Many working men and women who wanted changes in the world rallied around liberal and radical groups and parties in the early nineteenth century.
Some nationalists, liberals and radicals wanted revolutions to put an end to the kind of governments established in Europe in 1815.
In France, Italy, Germany and Russia, they became revolutionaries and worked to overthrow existing monarchs.
Nationalists talked of revolutions that would create ‘nations’ where all citizens would have equal rights.
After 1815, Giuseppe Mazzini, an Italian nationalist, conspired with others to achieve this in Italy.
Nationalists elsewhere – including India – read his writings.
The Coming of Socialism to Europe
Perhaps one of the most far-reaching visions of how society should be structured was socialism.
By the mid - nineteenth century in Europe, socialism was a well-known body of ideas that attracted widespread attention.
Socialists were against private property, and saw it as the root of all social ills of the time.
Why?
Individuals owned the property that gave employment but the propertied were concerned only with personal gain and not with the welfare of those who made the property productive.
So if society as a whole rather than single individuals controlled property, more attention would be paid to collective social interests.
Socialists wanted this change and campaigned for it.
How could a society without property operate?
What would be the basis of socialist society?
Socialists had different visions of the future.
Some believed in the idea of cooperatives.
Robert Owen (1771-1858), a leading English manufacturer, sought to build a cooperative community called New Harmony in Indiana (USA).
Other socialists felt that cooperatives could not be built on a wide scale only through individual initiative: they demanded that governments encourage cooperatives.
In France, for instance, Louis Blanc (1813-1882) wanted the government to encourage cooperatives and replace capitalist enterprises.
These cooperatives were to be associations of people who produced goods together and divided the profits according to the work done by members.
Karl Marx (1818-1883) and Friedrich Engels (1820-1895) added other ideas to this body of arguments.
Marx argued that industrial society was ‘capitalist’.
Capitalists owned the capital invested in factories, and the profit of capitalists was produced by workers.
The conditions of workers could not improve as long as this profit was accumulated by private capitalists.
Workers had to overthrow capitalism and the rule of private property.
Marx believed that to free themselves from capitalist exploitation, workers had to construct a radically socialist society where all property was socially controlled.
This would be a communist society.
He was convinced that workers would triumph in their conflict with capitalists.
A communist society was the natural society of the future.
Support for Socialism
By the 1870s, socialist ideas spread through Europe.
To coordinate their efforts, socialists formed an international body – namely, the Second International.
Workers in England and Germany began forming associations to fight for better living and working conditions.
They set up funds to help members in times of distress and demanded a reduction of working hours and the right to vote.
In Germany, these associations worked closely with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and helped it win parliamentary seats.
By 1905, socialists and trade unionists formed a Labour Party in Britain and a Socialist Party in France.
However, till 1914, socialists never succeeded in forming a government in Europe.
Represented by strong figures in parliamentary politics, their ideas did shape legislation, but governments continued to be run by conservatives, liberals and radicals.
The Russian Revolution
In one of the least industrialised of European states this situation was reversed.
Socialists took over the government in Russia through the October Revolution of 1917.
The fall of monarchy in February 1917 and the events of October are normally called the Russian Revolution.
How did this come about?
What were the social and political conditions in Russia when the revolution occurred?
To answer these questions, let us look at Russia a few years before the revolution.
The Russian Empire in 1914
In 1914, Tsar Nicholas II ruled Russia and its empire.
Besides the territory around Moscow, the Russian empire included current-day Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, parts of Poland, Ukraine and Belarus.
It stretched to the Pacific and comprised today’s Central Asian states, as well as Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
The majority religion was Russian Orthodox Christianity – which had grown out of the Greek Orthodox Church – but the empire also included Catholics, Protestants, Muslims and Buddhists.
Economy and Society
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the vast majority of Russia’s people were agriculturists.
About 85 per cent of the Russian empire’s population earned their living from agriculture.
This proportion was higher than in most European countries.
For instance, in France and Germany the proportion was between 40 per cent and 50 per cent.
In the empire, cultivators produced for the market as well as for their own needs and Russia was a major exporter of grain.
Industry was found in pockets.
Prominent industrial areas were St Petersburg and Moscow.
Craftsmen undertook much of the production, but large factories existed alongside craft workshops.
Many factories were set up in the 1890s, when Russia’s railway network was extended, and foreign investment in industry increased.
Coal production doubled and iron and steel output quadrupled.
By the 1900s, in some areas factory workers and craftsmen were almost equal in number.
Most industry was the private property of industrialists.
Government supervised large factories to ensure minimum wages and limited hours of work.
But factory inspectors could not prevent rules being broken.
In craft units and small workshops, the working day was sometimes 15 hours, compared with 10 or 12 hours in factories.
Accommodation varied from rooms to dormitories.
Workers were a divided social group.
Some had strong links with the villages from which they came.
Others had settled in cities permanently.
Workers were divided by skill.
A metalworker of St. Petersburg recalled, ‘Metalworkers considered themselves aristocrats among other workers.
Their occupations demanded more training and skill .
.
.
’ Women made up 31 per cent of the factory labour force by 1914, but they were paid less than men (between half and three-quarters of a man’s wage).
Divisions among workers showed themselves in dress and manners too.
Some workers formed associations to help members in times of unemployment or financial hardship but such associations were few.
Despite divisions, workers did unite to strike work (stop work) when they disagreed with employers about dismissals or work conditions.
These strikes took place frequently in the textile industry during 1896-1897, and in the metal industry during 1902.
In the countryside, peasants cultivated most of the land.
But the nobility, the crown and the Orthodox Church owned large properties.
Like workers, peasants too were divided.
They were also deeply religious.
But except in a few cases they had no respect for the nobility.
Nobles got their power and position through their services to the Tsar, not through local popularity.
This was unlike France where, during the French Revolution in Brittany, peasants respected nobles and fought for them.
In Russia, peasants wanted the land of the nobles to be given to them.
Frequently, they refused to pay rent and even murdered landlords.
In 1902, this occurred on a large scale in south Russia.
And in 1905, such incidents took place all over Russia.
Russian peasants were different from other European peasants in another way.
They pooled their land together periodically and their commune (mir) divided it according to the needs of individual families.
Socialism in Russia
All political parties were illegal in Russia before 1914.
The Russian Social Democratic Workers Party was founded in 1898 by socialists who respected Marx’s ideas.
However, because of government policing, it had to operate as an illegal organisation.
It set up a newspaper, mobilised workers and organised strikes.
Some Russian socialists felt that the Russian peasant custom of dividing land periodically made them natural socialists.
So peasants, not workers, would be the main force of the revolution, and Russia could become socialist more quickly than other countries.
Socialists were active in the countryside through the late nineteenth century.
They formed the Socialist Revolutionary Party in 1900.
This party struggled for peasants’ rights and demanded that land belonging to nobles be transferred to peasants.
Social Democrats disagreed with Socialist Revolutionaries about peasants.
Lenin felt that peasants were not one united group.
Some were poor and others rich, some worked as labourers while others were capitalists who employed workers.
Given this ‘differentiation’ within them, they could not all be part of a socialist movement.
The party was divided over the strategy of organisation.
Vladimir Lenin (who led the Bolshevik group) thought that in a repressive society like Tsarist Russia the party should be disciplined and should control the number and quality of its members.
Others (Mensheviks) thought that the party should be open to all (as in Germany).
A Turbulent Time: The 1905 Revolution
Russia was an autocracy.
Unlike other European rulers, even at the beginning of the twentieth century, the Tsar was not subject to parliament.
Liberals in Russia campaigned to end this state of affairs.
Together with the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries, they worked with peasants and workers during the revolution of 1905 to demand a constitution.
They were supported in the empire by nationalists (in Poland for instance) and in Muslim-dominated areas by jadidists who wanted modernised Islam to lead their societies.
The year 1904 was a particularly bad one for Russian workers.
Prices of essential goods rose so quickly that real wages declined by 20 per cent.
The membership of workers’ associations rose dramatically.
When four members of the Assembly of Russian Workers, which had been formed in 1904, were dismissed at the Putilov Iron Works, there was a call for industrial action.
Over the next few days over 110,000 workers in St Petersburg went on strike demanding a reduction in the working day to eight hours, an increase in wages and improvement in working conditions.
When the procession of workers led by Father Gapon reached the Winter Palace it was attacked by the police and the Cossacks.
Over 100 workers were killed and about 300 wounded.
The incident, known as Bloody Sunday, started a series of events that became known as the 1905 Revolution.
Strikes took place all over the country and universities closed down when student bodies staged walkouts, complaining about the lack of civil liberties.
Lawyers, doctors, engineers and other middle-class workers established the Union of Unions and demanded a constituent assembly.
During the 1905 Revolution, the Tsar allowed the creation of an elected consultative Parliament or Duma.
For a brief while during the revolution, there existed a large number of trade unions and factory committees made up of factory workers.
After 1905, most committees and unions worked unofficially, since they were declared illegal.
Severe restrictions were placed on political activity.
The Tsar dismissed the first Duma within 75 days and the re-elected second Duma within three months.
He did not want any questioning of his authority or any reduction in his power.
He changed the voting laws and packed the third Duma with conservative politicians.
Liberals and revolutionaries were kept out.
The First World War and the Russian Empire
In 1914, war broke out between two European alliances – Germany, Austria and Turkey (the Central powers) and France, Britain and Russia (later Italy and Romania).
Each country had a global empire and the war was fought outside Europe as well as in Europe.
This was the First World War.
In Russia, the war was initially popular and people rallied around Tsar Nicholas II.
As the war continued, though, the Tsar refused to consult the main parties in the Duma.
Support wore thin.
Anti- German sentiments ran high, as can be seen in the renaming of St Petersburg – a German name – as Petrograd.
The Tsarina Alexandra’s German origins and poor advisers, especially a monk called Rasputin, made the autocracy unpopular.
The First World War on the ‘eastern front’ differed from that on the ‘western front’.
In the west, armies fought from trenches stretched along eastern France.
In the east, armies moved a good deal and fought battles leaving large casualties.
Defeats were shocking and demoralising.
Russia’s armies lost badly in Germany and Austria between 1914 and 1916.
There were over 7 million casualties by 1917.
As they retreated, the Russian army destroyed crops and buildings to prevent the enemy from being able to live off the land.
The destruction of crops and buildings led to over 3 million refugees in Russia.
The situation discredited the government and the Tsar.
Soldiers did not wish to fight such a war.
The war also had a severe impact on industry.
Russia’s own industries were few in number and the country was cut off from other suppliers of industrial goods by German control of the Baltic Sea.
Industrial equipment disintegrated more rapidly in Russia than elsewhere in Europe.
By 1916, railway lines began to break down.
Able-bodied men were called up to the war.
As a result, there were labour shortages and small workshops producing essentials were shut down.
Large supplies of grain were sent to feed the army.
For the people in the cities, bread and flour became scarce.
By the winter of 1916, riots at bread shops were common.
The February Revolution in Petrograd
In the winter of 1917, conditions in the capital, Petrograd, were grim.
The layout of the city seemed to emphasise the divisions among its people.
The workers’ quarters and factories were located on the right bank of the River Neva.
On the left bank were the fashionable areas, the Winter Palace, and official buildings, including the palace where the Duma met.
In February 1917, food shortages were deeply felt in the workers’ quarters.
The winter was very cold – there had been exceptional frost and heavy snow.
Parliamentarians wishing to preserve elected government, were opposed to the Tsar’s desire to dissolve the Duma.
On 22 Fe bruary, a lockout took place at a factory on the right bank.
The next day, workers in fifty factories called a strike in sympathy.
In many factories, women led the way to strikes.
This came to be called the International Women’s Day.
Demonstrating workers crossed from the factory quarters to the centre of the capital – the Nevskii Prospekt.
At this stage, no political party was actively organising the movement.
As the fashionable quarters and official buildings were surrounded by workers, the government imposed a curfew.
Demonstrators dispersed by the evening, but they came back on the 24th and 25th.
The government called out the cavalry and police to keep an eye on them.
On Sunday, 25 February, the government suspended the Duma.
Politicians spoke out against the measure.
Demonstrators returned in force to the streets of the left bank on the 26th.
On the 27th, the Police Headquarters were ransacked.
The streets thronged with people raising slogans about bread, wages, better hours and democracy.
The government tried to control the situation and called out the cavalry once again.
However, the cavalry refused to fire on the demonstrators.
An officer was shot at the barracks of a regiment and three other regiments mutinied, voting to join the striking workers.
By that evening, soldiers and striking workers had gathered to form a ‘soviet’ or ‘council’ in the same building as the Duma met.
This was the Petrograd Soviet.
The very next day, a delegation went to see the Tsar.
Military commanders advised him to abdicate.
He followed their advice and abdicated on 2 March.
Soviet leaders and Duma leaders formed a Provisional Government to run the country.
Russia’s future would be decided by a constituent assembly, elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage.
Petrograd had led the February Revolution that brought down the monarchy in February 1917.
After February
Army officials, landowners and industrialists were influential in the Provisional Government.
But the liberals as well as socialists among them worked towards an elected government.
Restrictions on public meetings and associations were removed.
‘Soviets’, like the Petrograd Soviet, were set up everywhere, though no common system of election was followed.
In April 1917, the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin returned to Russia from his exile.
He and the Bolsheviks had opposed the war since 1914.
Now he felt it was time for soviets to take over power.
He declared that the war be brought to a close, land be transferred to the peasants, and banks be nationalised.
These three demands were Lenin’s ‘April Theses’.
He also argued that the Bolshevik Party rename itself the Communist Party to indicate its new radical aims.
Most others in the Bolshevik Party were initially surprised by the April Theses.
They thought that the time was not yet ripe for a
socialist revolution and the Provisional Government needed to be supported.
But the developments of the subsequent months changed their attitude.
Through the summer the workers’ movement spread.
In industrial areas, factory committees were formed which began questioning the way industrialists ran their factories.
Trade unions grew in number.
Soldiers’ committees were formed in the army.
In June, about 500 Soviets sent representatives to an All Russian Congress of Soviets.
As the Provisional Government saw its power reduce and Bolshevik influence grow, it decided to take stern measures against the spreading discontent.
It resisted attempts by workers to run factories and began arresting leaders.
Popular demonstrations staged by the Bolsheviks in July 1917 were sternly repressed.
Many Bolshevik leaders had to go into hiding or flee.
Meanwhile in the countryside, peasants and their Socialist Revolutionary leaders pressed for a redistribution of land.
Land committees were formed to handle this.
Encouraged by the Socialist Revolutionaries, peasants seized land between July and September 1917.
The Revolution of October 1917
As the conflict between the Provisional Government and the Bolsheviks grew, Lenin feared the Provisional Government would set up a dictatorship.
In September, he began discussions for an uprising against the government.
Bolshevik supporters in the army, soviets and factories were brought together.
On 16 October 1917, Lenin persuaded the Petrograd Soviet and the Bolshevik Party to agree to a socialist seizure of power.
A Military Revolutionary Committee was appointed by the Soviet under Leon Trotskii to organise the seizure.
The date of the event was kept a secret.
The uprising began on 24 October.
Sensing trouble, Prime Minister Kerenskii had left the city to summon troops.
At dawn, military men loyal to the government seized the buildings of two Bolshevik newspapers.
Pro-government troops were sent to take over telephone and telegraph offices and protect the Winter Palace.
In a swift response, the Military Revolutionary Committee ordered its supporters to seize government offices and arrest ministers.
Late in the day, the ship Aurora shelled the Winter Palace.
Other vessels sailed down the Neva and took over various military points.
By nightfall, the city was under the committee’s control and the ministers had surrendered.
At a meeting of the All Russian Congress of Soviets in Petrograd, the majority approved the Bolshevik action.
Uprisings took place in other cities.
There was heavy fighting – especially in Moscow – but by December, the Bolsheviks controlled the Moscow-Petrograd area.
What Changed after October?
The Bolsheviks were totally opposed to private property.
Most industry and banks were nationalised in November 1917.
This meant that the government took over ownership and management.
Land was declared social property and peasants were allowed to seize the land of the nobility.
In cities, Bolsheviks enforced the partition of large houses according to family requirements.
They banned the use of the old titles of aristocracy.
To assert the change, new uniforms were designed for the army and officials, following a clothing competition organised in 1918 – when the Soviet hat (budeonovka) was chosen.
The Bolshevik Party was renamed the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik).
In November 1917, the Bolsheviks conducted the elections to the Constituent Assembly, but they failed to gain majority support.
In January 1918, the Assembly rejected Bolshevik measures and Lenin dismissed the Assembly.
He thought the All Russian Congress of Soviets was more democratic than an assembly  elected in uncertain conditions.
In March 1918, despite opposition by their political allies, the Bolsheviks made peace with Germany at Brest Litovsk.
In the years that followed, the Bolsheviks became the only party to participate in the elections to the All Russian Congress of Soviets, which became the Parliament of the country.
Russia became a one-party state.
Trade unions were kept under party control.
The secret police (called the Cheka first, and later OGPU and NKVD) punished those who criticised the Bolsheviks.
Many young writers and artists rallied to the Party because it stood for socialism and for change.
After October 1917, this led to experiments in the arts and architecture.
The Bolshevik Party was renamed the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik).
In November 1917, the Bolsheviks conducted the elections to the Constituent Assembly, but they failed to gain majority support.
In January 1918, the Assembly rejected Bolshevik measures and Lenin dismissed the Assembly.
He thought the All Russian Congress of Soviets was more democratic than an assembly elected in uncertain conditions.
In March 1918, despite opposition by their political allies, the Bolsheviks made peace with Germany at Brest Litovsk.
In the years that followed, the Bolsheviks became the only party to participate in the elections to the All Russian Congress of Soviets, which became the Parliament of the country.
Russia became a one-party state.
Trade unions were kept under party control.
The secret police (called the Cheka first, and later OGPU and NKVD) punished those who criticised the Bolsheviks.
Many young writers and artists rallied to the Party because it stood for socialism and for change.
After October 1917, this led to experiments in the arts and architecture.
But many became disillusioned because of the censorship the Party encouraged.
The Civil War
When the Bolsheviks ordered land redistribution, the Russian army began to break up.
Soldiers, mostly peasants, wished to go home for the redistribution and deserted.
Non-Bolshevik socialists, liberals and supporters of autocracy condemned the Bolshevik uprising.
Their leaders moved to south Russia and organised troops to fight the Bolsheviks (the ‘reds’).
During 1918 and 1919, the ‘greens’ (Socialist Revolutionaries) and ‘whites’ (pro-Tsarists) controlled most of the Russian empire.
They were backed by French, American, British and Japanese troops – all those forces who were worried at the growth of socialism in Russia.
As these troops and the Bolsheviks fought a civil war, looting, banditry and famine became common.
Supporters of private property among ‘whites’ took harsh steps with peasants who had seized land.
Such actions led to the loss of popular support for the non-Bolsheviks.
By January 1920, the Bolsheviks controlled most of the former Russian empire.
They succeeded due
They succeeded due to cooperation with non-Russian nationalities and Muslim jadidists.
Cooperation did not work where Russian colonists themselves turned Bolshevik.
In Khiva, in Central Asia, Bolshevik colonists brutally massacred local nationalists in the name of defending socialism.
In this situation, many were confused about what the Bolshevik government represented.
Partly to remedy this, most non-Russian nationalities were given political autonomy in the Soviet Union (USSR) – the state the Bolsheviks created from the Russian empire in December 1922.
But since this was combined with unpopular policies that the Bolsheviks forced the local government to follow – like the harsh discouragement of nomadism – attempts to win over different nationalities were only partly successful.
Making a Socialist Society
During the civil war, the Bolsheviks kept industries and banks nationalised.
They permitted peasants to cultivate the land that had been socialised.
Bolsheviks used confiscated land to demonstrate what collective work could be.
A process of centralised planning was introduced.
Officials assessed how the economy could work and set targets for a five-year period.
On this basis they made the Five Year Plans.
The government fixed all prices to promote industrial growth during the first two ‘Plans’
(1927-1932 and 1933-1938).
Centralised planning led to economic growth.
Industrial production increased (between 1929 and 1933 by 100 per cent in the case of oil, coal and steel).
New factory cities came into being.
However, rapid construction led to poor working conditions.
In the city of Magnitogorsk, the construction of a steel plant was achieved in three years.
Workers lived hard lives and the result was 550 stoppages of work in the first year alone.
In living quarters, ‘in the wintertime, at 40 degrees below, people had to climb down from the fourth floor and dash across the street in order to go to the toilet’.
An extended schooling system developed, and arrangements were made for factory workers and peasants to enter universities.
Crèches were established in factories for the children of women workers.
Cheap public health care was provided.
Model living quarters were set up for workers.
The effect of all this was uneven, though, since government resources were limited.
Stalinism and Collectivisation
The period of the early Planned Economy was linked to the disasters of the collectivisation of agriculture.
By 1927- 1928, the towns in Soviet Russia were facing an acute problem of grain supplies.
The government fixed prices at which grain must be sold, but the peasants refused to sell their grain to government buyers at these prices.
Stalin, who headed the party after the death of Lenin, introduced firm emergency measures.
He believed that rich peasants and traders in the countryside were holding stocks in the hope of higher prices.
Speculation had to be stopped and supplies confiscated.
In 1928, Party members toured the grain-producing areas, supervising enforced grain collections, and raiding ‘kulaks’ – the name for well- to-do peasants.
As shortages continued, the decision was taken to collectivise farms.
It was argued that grain shortages were partly due to the small size of holdings.
After 1917, land had been given over to peasants.
These small-sized peasant farms could not be modernised.
To develop modern farms, and run them along industrial lines with machinery, it was necessary to ‘eliminate kulaks’, take away land from peasants, and establish state-controlled large farms.
Fig.18 – A poster during collectivisation.
It states: ‘We shall strike at the kulak working for the decrease in cultivation.’ What followed was Stalin’s collectivisation programme.
From 1929, the Party forced all peasants to cultivate in collective farms (kolkhoz).
The bulk of land and implements were transferred to the ownership of collective farms.
Peasants worked on the land, and the kolkhoz profit was shared.
Enraged peasants resisted the authorities and destroyed their livestock.
Between 1929 and 1931, the number of cattle fell by one-third.
Those who resisted collectivisation were severely punished.
Many were deported and exiled.
As they resisted collectivisation, peasants argued that they were not rich and they were not against socialism.
They merely did not want to work in collective farms for a variety of reasons.
Stalin’s government allowed some independent cultivation, but treated such cultivators unsympathetically.
In spite of collectivisation, production did not increase immediately.
In fact, the bad harvests of 1930-1933 led to one of most devastating famines in Soviet history when over 4 million died.
Many within the Party criticised the confusion in industrial production under the Planned Economy and the consequences of collectivisation.
Stalin and his sympathisers charged these critics with conspiracy against socialism.
Accusations were made throughout the country, and by 1939, over 2 million were in prisons or labour camps.
Most were innocent of the crimes, but no one spoke for them.
A large number were forced to make false confessions under torture and were executed – several among them were talented professionals.
The Global Influence of the Russian Revolution and the USSR
Existing socialist parties in Europe did not wholly approve of the way the Bolsheviks took power – and kept it.
However, the possibility of a workers’ state fired people’s imagination across the world.
In many countries, communist parties were formed – like the Communist Party of Great Britain.
The Bolsheviks encouraged colonial peoples to follow their experiment.
Many non-Russians from outside the USSR participated in the Conference of the Peoples of the East (1920) and the Bolshevik-founded Comintern (an international union of pro-Bolshevik socialist parties).
Some received education in the USSR’s Communist University of the Workers of the East.
By the time of the outbreak of the Second World War, the USSR had given socialism a global face and world stature.
Yet by the 1950s it was acknowledged within the country that the style of government in the USSR was not in keeping with the ideals of the Russian Revolution.
In the world socialist movement too it was recognised that all was not well in the Soviet Union.
A backward country had become a great power.
Its industries and agriculture had developed and the poor were being fed.
But it had denied the essential freedoms to its citizens and carried out its developmental projects through repressive policies.
By the end of the twentieth century, the international reputation of the USSR as a socialist country had declined though it was recognised that socialist ideals still enjoyed respect among its people.
But in each country the ideas of socialism were rethought in a variety of different ways.
Take a quick look around your school and home and identify all the things that come from forests: the paper in the book you are reading, desks and tables, doors and windows, the dyes that colour your clothes, spices in your food, the cellophane wrapper of your toffee, tendu leaf in bidis, gum, honey, coffee, tea and rubber.
Do not miss out the oil in chocolates, which comes from sal seeds, the tannin used to convert skins and hides into leather, or the herbs and roots used for medicinal purposes.
Forests also provide bamboo, wood for fuel, grass, charcoal, packaging, fruits, flowers, animals, birds and many other things.
In the Amazon forests or in the Western Ghats, it is possible to find as many as 500 different plant species in one forest patch.
A lot of this diversity is fast disappearing.
Between 1700 and 1995, the period of industrialisation, 13.9 million sq km of forest or 9.3 per cent of the world’s total area was cleared for industrial uses, cultivation, pastures and fuelwood.
Why Deforestation?
The disappearance of forests is referred to as deforestation.
Deforestation is not a recent problem.
The process began many centuries ago; but under colonial rule it became more systematic and extensive.
Let us look at some of the causes of deforestation in India.
Land to be Improved
In 1600, approximately one-sixth of India’s landmass was under cultivation.
Now that figure has gone up to about half.
As population increased over the centuries and the demand for food went up, peasants extended the boundaries of cultivation, clearing forests and breaking new land.
In the colonial period, cultivation expanded rapidly for a variety of reasons.
First, the British directly encouraged the production of commercial crops like jute, sugar, wheat and cotton.
The demand for these crops increased in nineteenth-century Europe where foodgrains were needed to feed the growing urban population and raw materials were required for industrial production.
Second, in the early nineteenth century, the colonial state thought that forests were unproductive.
They were considered to be wilderness that had to be brought under cultivation so that the land could yield agricultural products and revenue, and enhance the income of the state.
So between 1880 and 1920, cultivated area rose by 6.7 million hectares.
We always see the expansion of cultivation as a sign of progress.
But we should not forget that for land to be brought under the plough, forests have to be cleared.
The absence of cultivation in a place does not mean the land was uninhabited.
In Australia, when the white settlers landed, they claimed that the continent was empty or terra nullius.
In fact, they were guided through the landscape by aboriginal tracks, and led by aboriginal guides.
The different aboriginal communities in Australia had clearly demarcated territories.
The Ngarrindjeri people of Australia plotted their land along the symbolic body of the first ancestor, Ngurunderi.
This land included five different environments: salt water, riverine tracts, lakes, bush and desert plains, which satisfied different socio-economic needs.
The idea that uncultivated land had to be taken over and improved was popular with colonisers everywhere in the world.
It was an argument that justified conquest.
In 1896 the American writer, Richard Harding, wrote on the Honduras in Central America: ‘There is no more interesting question of the present day than that of what is to be done with the world’s land which is lying unimproved; whether it shall go to the great power that is willing to turn it to account, or remain with its original owner, who fails to understand its value.
The Central Americans are like a gang of semi-barbarians in a beautifully furnished house, of which they can understand neither its possibilities of comfort nor its use.’
Three years later the American-owned United Fruit Company was founded, and grew bananas on an industrial scale in Central America.
The company acquired such power over the governments of these countries that they came to be known as Banana Republics.
Quoted in David Spurr, The Rhetoric of Empire, (1993).
Sleepers on the Tracks
By the early nineteenth century, oak forests in England were disappearing.
This created a problem of timber supply for the Royal Navy.
How could English ships be built without a regular supply of strong and durable timber?
How could imperial power be protected and maintained without ships?
By the 1820s, search parties were sent to explore the forest resources of India.
Within a decade, trees were being felled on a massive scale and vast quantities of timber were being exported from India.
The spread of railways from the 1850s created a new demand.
Railways were essential for colonial trade and for the movement of imperial troops.
To run locomotives, wood was needed as fuel, and to lay railway lines sleepers were essential to hold the tracks together.
Each mile of railway track required between 1,760 and 2,000 sleepers.
From the 1860s, the railway network expanded rapidly.
By 1890, about 25,500 km of track had been laid.
In 1946, the length of the tracks had increased to over 765,000 km.
As the railway tracks spread through India, a larger and larger number of trees were felled.
As early as the 1850s, in the Madras Presidency alone, 35,000 trees were being cut annually for sleepers.
The government gave out contracts to individuals to supply the required quantities.
These contractors began cutting trees indiscriminately.
Forests around the railway tracks fast started disappearing.
Plantations
Large areas of natural forests were also cleared to make way for tea, coffee and rubber plantations to meet Europe’s growing need for these commodities.
The colonial government took over the forests, and gave vast areas to European planters at cheap rates.
These areas were enclosed and cleared of forests, and planted with tea or coffee.
The Rise of Commercial Forestry
In the previous section we have seen that the British needed forests in order to build ships and railways.
The British were worried that the use of forests by local people and the reckless felling of trees by traders would destroy forests.
So they decided to invite a German expert, Dietrich Brandis, for advice, and made him the first Inspector General of Forests in India.
Brandis realised that a proper system had to be introduced to manage the forests and people had to be trained in the science of conservation.
This system would need legal sanction.
Rules about the use of forest resources had to be framed.
Felling of trees and grazing had to be restricted so that forests could be preserved for timber production.
Anybody who cut trees without following the system had to be punished.
So Brandis set up the Indian Forest Service in 1864 and helped formulate the Indian Forest Act of 1865.
The Imperial Forest Research Institute was set up at Dehradun in 1906.
The system they taught here was called ‘scientific forestry’.
Many people now, including ecologists, feel that this system is not scientific at all.
In scientific forestry, natural forests which had lots of different types of trees were cut down.
In their place, one type of tree was planted in straight rows.
This is called a plantation.
Forest officials surveyed the forests, estimated the area under different types of trees, and made working plans for forest management.
They planned how much of the plantation area to cut every year.
The area cut was then to be replanted so that it was ready to be cut again in some years.
After the Forest Act was enacted in 1865, it was amended twice, once in 1878 and then in 1927.
The 1878 Act divided forests into three categories: reserved, protected and village forests.
The best forests were called ‘reserved forests’.
Villagers could not take anything from these forests, even for their own use.
For house building or fuel, they could take wood from protected or village forests.
How were the Lives of People Affected?
Foresters and villagers had very different ideas of what a good forest should look like.
Villagers wanted forests with a mixture of species to satisfy different needs – fuel, fodder, leaves.
The forest department on the other hand wanted trees which were suitable for building ships or railways.
They needed trees that could provide hard wood, and were tall and straight.
So particular species like teak and sal were promoted and others were cut.
In forest areas, people use forest products – roots, leaves, fruits, and tubers – for many things.
Fruits and tubers are nutritious to eat, especially during the monsoons before the harvest has come in.
Herbs are used for medicine, wood for agricultural implements like yokes and ploughs, bamboo makes excellent fences and is also used to make baskets and umbrellas.
A dried scooped-out gourd can be used as a portable water bottle.
Almost everything is available in the forest – leaves can be stitched together to make disposable plates and cups, the siadi (Bauhinia vahlii) creeper can be used to make ropes, and the thorny bark of the semur (silk-cotton) tree is used to grate vegetables.
Oil for cooking and to light lamps can be pressed from the fruit of the mahua tree.
The Forest Act meant severe hardship for villagers across the country.
After the Act, all their everyday practices – cutting wood for their houses, grazing their cattle, collecting fruits and roots, hunting and fishing – became illegal.
People were now forced to steal wood from the forests, and if they were caught, they were at the mercy of the forest guards who would take bribes from them.
Women who collected fuelwood were especially worried.
It was also common for police constables and forest guards to harass people by demanding free food from them.
How did Forest Rules Affect Cultivation?
One of the major impacts of European colonialism was on the practice of shifting cultivation or swidden agriculture.
This is a traditional agricultural practice in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America.
It has many local names such as lading in Southeast Asia, milpa in Central America, chitemene or tavy in Africa, and chena in Sri Lanka.
In India, dhya, penda, bewar, nevad, jhum, podu, khandad and kumri are some of the local terms for swidden agriculture.
In shifting cultivation, parts of the forest are cut and burnt in rotation.
Seeds are sown in the ashes after the first monsoon rains, and the crop is harvested by October-November.
Such plots are cultivated for a couple of years and then left fallow for 12 to 18 years for the forest to grow back.
A mixture of crops is grown on these plots.
In central India and Africa it could be millets, in Brazil manioc, and in other parts of Latin America maize and beans.
European foresters regarded this practice as harmful for the forests.
They felt that land which was used for cultivation every few years could not grow trees for railway timber.
When a forest was burnt, there was the added danger of the flames spreading and burning valuable timber.
Shifting cultivation also made it harder for the government to calculate taxes.
Therefore, the government decided to ban shifting cultivation.
As a result, many communities were forcibly displaced from their homes in the forests.
Some had to change occupations, while some resisted through large and small rebellions.
Who could Hunt?
The new forest laws changed the lives of forest dwellers in yet another way.
Before the forest laws, many people who lived in or near forests had survived by hunting deer, partridges and a variety of small animals.
This customary practice was prohibited by the forest laws.
Those who were caught hunting were now punished for poaching.
While the forest laws deprived people of their customary rights to hunt, hunting of big game became a sport.
In India, hunting of tigers and other animals had been part of the culture of the court and nobility for centuries.
Many Mughal paintings show princes and emperors enjoying a hunt.
But under colonial rule the scale of hunting increased to such an extent that various species became almost extinct.
The British saw large animals as signs of a wild, primitive and savage society.
They believed that by killing dangerous animals the British would civilise India.
They gave rewards for the killing of tigers, wolves and other large animals on the grounds that they posed a threat to cultivators.
0ver 80,000 tigers, 150,000 leopards and 200,000 wolves were killed for reward in the period 1875-1925.
Gradually, the tiger came to be seen as a sporting trophy.
The Maharaja of Sarguja alone shot 1,157 tigers and 2,000 leopards up to 1957.
A British administrator, George Yule, killed 400 tigers.
Initially certain areas of forests were reserved for hunting.
Only much later did environmentalists and conservators begin to argue that all these species of animals needed to be protected, and not killed.
New Trades, New Employments and New Services
While people lost out in many ways after the forest department took control of the forests, some people benefited from the new opportunities that had opened up in trade.
Many communities left their traditional occupations and started trading in forest products.
This happened not only in India but across the world.
For example, with the growing demand for rubber in the mid-nineteenth century, the Mundurucu peoples of the Brazilian Amazon who lived in villages on high ground and cultivated manioc, began to collect latex from wild rubber trees for supplying to traders.
Gradually, they descended to live in trading posts and became completely dependent on traders.
In India, the trade in forest products was not new.
From the medieval period onwards, we have records of adivasi communities trading elephants and other goods like hides, horns, silk cocoons, ivory, bamboo, spices, fibres, grasses, gums and resins through nomadic communities like the Banjaras.
With the coming of the British, however, trade was completely regulated by the government.
The British government gave many large European trading firms the sole right to trade in the forest products of particular areas.
Grazing and hunting by local people were restricted.
In the process, many pastoralist and nomadic communities like the Korava, Karacha and Yerukula of the Madras Presidency lost their livelihoods.
Some of them began to be called ‘criminal tribes’, and were forced to work instead in factories, mines and plantations, under government supervision.
New opportunities of work did not always mean improved well- being for the people.
In Assam, both men and women from forest communities like Santhals and Oraons from Jharkhand, and Gonds from Chhattisgarh were recruited to work on tea plantations.
Their wages were low and conditions of work were very bad.
They could not return easily to their home villages from where they had been recruited.
Rebellion in the Forest
In many parts of India, and across the world, forest communities rebelled against the changes that were being imposed on them.
The leaders of these movements against the British like Siddhu and Kanu in the Santhal Parganas, Birsa Munda of Chhotanagpur or Alluri Sitarama Raju of Andhra Pradesh are still remembered today in songs and stories.
We will now discuss in detail one such rebellion which took place in the kingdom of Bastar in 1910.
The People of Bastar
Bastar is located in the southernmost part of Chhattisgarh and borders Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Maharashtra.
The central part of Bastar is on a plateau.
To the north of this plateau is the Chhattisgarh plain and to its south is the Godavari plain.
The river Indrawati winds across Bastar east to west.
A number of different communities live in Bastar such as Maria and Muria Gonds, Dhurwas, Bhatras and Halbas.
They speak different languages but share common customs and beliefs.
The people of Bastar believe that each village was given its land by the Earth, and in return, they look after the earth by making some offerings at each agricultural festival.
In addition to the Earth, they show respect to the spirits of the river, the forest and the mountain.
Since each village knows where its boundaries lie, the local people look after all the natural resources within that boundary.
If people from a village want to take some wood from the forests of another village, they pay a small fee called devsari, dand or man in exchange.
Some villages also protect their forests by engaging watchmen and each household contributes some grain to pay them.
Every year there is one big hunt where the headmen of villages in a pargana (cluster of villages) meet and discuss issues of concern, including forests.
The Fears of the People
When the colonial government proposed to reserve two-thirds of the forest in 1905, and stop shifting cultivation, hunting and collection of forest produce, the people of Bastar were very worried.
Some villages were allowed to stay on in the reserved forests on the condition that they worked free for the forest department in cutting and transporting trees, and protecting the forest from fires.
Subsequently, these came to be known as ‘forest villages’.
People of other villages were displaced without any notice or compensation.
For long, villagers had been suffering from increased land rents and frequent demands for free labour and goods by colonial officials.
Then came the terrible famines, in 1899-1900 and again in 1907-1908.
Reservations proved to be the last straw.
People began to gather and discuss these issues in their village councils, in bazaars and at festivals or wherever the headmen and priests of several villages were assembled.
The initiative was taken by the Dhurwas of the Kanger forest, where reservation first took place.
Although there was no single leader, many people speak of Gunda Dhur, from village Nethanar, as an important figure in the movement.
In 1910, mango boughs, a lump of earth, chillies and arrows, began circulating between villages.
These were actually messages inviting villagers to rebel against the British.
Every village contributed something to the rebellion expenses.
Bazaars were looted, the houses of officials and traders, schools and police stations were burnt and robbed, and grain redistributed.
Most of those who were attacked were in some way associated with the colonial state and its oppressive laws.
William Ward, a missionary who observed the events, wrote: ‘From all directions came streaming into Jagdalpur, police, merchants, forest peons, schoolmasters and immigrants.’
The British sent troops to suppress the rebellion.
The adivasi leaders tried to negotiate, but the British surrounded their camps and fired upon them.
After that they marched through the villages flogging and punishing those who had taken part in the rebellion.
Most villages were deserted as people fled into the jungles.
It took three months (February - May) for the British to regain control.
However, they never managed to capture Gunda Dhur.
In a major victory for the rebels, work on reservation was temporarily suspended, and the area to be reserved was reduced to roughly half of that planned before 1910.
The story of the forests and people of Bastar does not end there.
After Independence, the same practice of keeping people out of the forests and reserving them for industrial use continued.
In the 1970s, the World Bank proposed that 4,600 hectares of natural sal forest should be replaced by tropical pine to provide pulp for the paper industry.
It was only after protests by local environmentalists that the project was stopped.
Let us now go to another part of Asia, Indonesia, and see what was happening there over the same period.
Forest Transformations in Java
Java is now famous as a rice-producing island in Indonesia.
But once upon a time it was covered mostly with forests.
The colonial power in Indonesia were the Dutch, and as we will see, there were many similarities in the laws for forest control in Indonesia and India.
Java in Indonesia is where the Dutch started forest management.
Like the British, they wanted timber from Java to build ships.
In 1600, the population of Java was an estimated 3.4 million.
There were many villages in the fertile plains, but there were also many communities living in the mountains and practising shifting cultivation.
The Woodcutters of Java
The Kalangs of Java were a community of skilled forest cutters and shifting cultivators.
They were so valuable that in 1755 when the Mataram kingdom of Java split, the 6,000 Kalang families were equally divided between the two kingdoms.
Without their expertise, it would have been difficult to harvest teak and for the kings to build their palaces.
When the Dutch began to gain control over the forests in the eighteenth century, they tried to make the Kalangs work under them.
In 1770, the Kalangs resisted by attacking a Dutch fort at Joana, but the uprising was suppressed.
Dutch Scientific Forestry
In the nineteenth century, when it became important to control territory and not just people, the Dutch enacted forest laws in Java, restricting villagers’ access to forests.
Now wood could only be cut for specified purposes like making river boats or constructing houses, and only from specific forests under close supervision.
Villagers were punished for grazing cattle in young stands, transporting wood without a permit, or travelling on forest roads with horse carts or cattle.
As in India, the need to manage forests for shipbuilding and railways led to the introduction of a forest service.
In 1882, 280,000 sleepers were exported from Java alone.
However, all this required labour to cut the trees, transport the logs and prepare the sleepers.
The Dutch first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest and then exempted some villages from these rents if they worked collectively to provide free labour and buffaloes for cutting and transporting timber.
This was known as the blandongdiensten system.
Later, instead of rent exemption, forest villagers were given small wages, but their right to cultivate forest land was restricted.
Samin’s Challenge
Around 1890, Surontiko Samin of Randublatung village, a teak forest village, began questioning state ownership of the forest.
He argued that the state had not created the wind, water, earth and wood, so it could not own it.
Soon a widespread movement developed.
Amongst those who helped organise it were Samin’s sons-in-law.
By 1907, 3,000 families were following his ideas.
Some of the Saminists protested by lying down on their land when the Dutch came to survey it, while others refused to pay taxes or fines or perform labour.
War and Deforestation
The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact on forests.
In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs.
In Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region, the Dutch followed ‘a scorched earth’ policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into Japanese hands.
The Japanese then exploited the forests recklessly for their own war industries, forcing forest villagers to cut down forests.
Many villagers used this opportunity to expand cultivation in the forest.
After the war, it was difficult for the Indonesian forest service to get this land back.
As in India, people’s need for agricultural land has brought them into conflict with the forest department’s desire to control the land and exclude people from it.
New Developments in Forestry
Since the 1980s, governments across Asia and Africa have begun to see that scientific forestry and the policy of keeping forest communities away from forests has resulted in many conflicts.
Conservation of forests rather than collecting timber has become a more important goal.
The government has recognised that in order to meet this goal, the people who live near the forests must be involved.
In many cases, across India, from Mizoram to Kerala, dense forests have survived only because villages protected them in sacred groves known as sarnas, devarakudu, kan, rai, etc.
Some villages have been patrolling their own forests, with each household taking it in turns, instead of leaving it to the forest guards.
Local forest communities and environmentalists today are thinking of different forms of forest management.
It is easy to forget that there is a history to the clothes we wear.
All societies observe certain rules, some of them quite strict, about the way in which men, women and children should dress, or how different social classes and groups should present themselves.
These norms come to define the identity of people, the way they see themselves, the way they want others to see them.
They shape our notions of grace and beauty, ideas of modesty and shame.
As times change and societies are transformed, these notions also alter.
Modifications in clothing come to reflect these changes.
Before the age of democratic revolutions and the development of capitalist markets in eighteenth-century Europe, most people dressed according to their regional codes, and were limited by the types of clothes and the cost of materials that were available in their region.
Clothing styles were also strictly regulated by class, gender or status in the social hierarchy.
After the eighteenth century, the colonisation of most of the world by Europe, the spread of democratic ideals and the growth of an industrial society, completely changed the ways in which people thought about dress and its meanings.
People could use styles and materials that were drawn from other cultures and locations, and western dress styles for men were adopted worldwide.
Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
In medieval Europe, dress codes were sometimes imposed upon members of different layers of society through actual laws which were spelt out in some detail.
From about 1294 to the time of the French Revolution in 1789, the people of France were expected to strictly follow what were known as ‘sumptuary laws.’ The laws tried to control the behaviour of those considered social inferiors, preventing them from wearing certain clothes, consuming certain foods and beverages (usually this referred to alcohol) and hunting game in certain areas.
In medieval France, the items of clothing a person could purchase per year was regulated, not only by income but also by social rank.
The material to be used for clothing was also legally prescribed.
Only royalty could wear expensive materials like ermine and fur, or silk, velvet and brocade.
Other classes were debarred from clothing themselves with materials that were associated with the aristocracy.
The French Revolution ended these distinctions.
As you know from Chapter I, members of the Jacobin clubs even called themselves the ‘sans culottes’ to distinguish themselves from the aristocracy who wore the fashionable ‘knee breeches’.
Sans culottes literally meant those ‘without knee breeches’.
From now on, both men and women began wearing clothing that was loose and comfortable.
The colours of France – blue, white and red – became popular as they were a sign of the patriotic citizen.
Other political symbols too became a part of dress: the red cap of liberty, long trousers and the revolutionary cockade pinned on to a hat.
The simplicity of clothing was meant to express the idea of equality.
Clothing and Notions of Beauty
The end of sumptuary laws did not mean that everyone in European societies could now dress in the same way.
The French Revolution had raised the question of equality and ended aristocratic privileges, as well as the laws that maintained those privileges.
However, differences between social strata remained.
Clearly, the poor could not dress like the rich, nor eat the same food.
But laws no longer barred people’s right to dress in the way they wished.
Differences in earning, rather than sumptuary laws, now defined what the rich and poor could wear.
And different classes developed their own culture of dress.
The notion of what was beautiful or ugly, proper or improper, decent or vulgar, differed.
Styles of clothing also emphasised differences between men and women.
Women in Victorian England were groomed from childhood to be docile and dutiful, submissive and obedient.
The ideal woman was one who could bear pain and suffering.
While men were expected to be serious, strong, independent and aggressive, women were seen as frivolous, delicate, passive and docile.
Norms of clothing reflected these ideals.
From childhood, girls were tightly laced up and dressed in stays.
The effort was to restrict the growth of their bodies, contain them within small moulds.
When slightly older, girls had to wear tight fitting corsets.
Tightly laced, small-waisted women were admired as attractive, elegant and graceful.
Clothing thus played a part in creating the image of frail, submissive Victorian women.
How Did Women React to These Norms?
Many women believed in the ideals of womanhood.
The ideals were in the air they breathed, the literature they read, the education they had received at school and at home.
From childhood they grew up to believe that having a small waist was a womanly duty.
Suffering pain was essential to being a woman.
To be seen as attractive, to be womanly, they had to wear the corset.
The torture and pain this inflicted on the body was to be accepted as normal.
But not everyone accepted these values.
Over the nineteenth century, ideas changed.
By the 1830s, women in England began agitating for democratic rights.
As the suffrage movement developed, many began campaigning for dress reform.
Women’s magazines described how tight dresses and corsets caused deformities and illness among young girls.
Such clothing restricted body growth and hampered blood circulation.
Muscles remained underdeveloped and the spines got bent.
Doctors reported that many women were regularly complaining of acute weakness, felt languid, and fainted frequently.
Corsets then became necessary to hold up the weakened spine.
In America, a similar movement developed amongst the white settlers on the east coast.
Traditional feminine clothes were criticised on a variety of grounds.
Long skirts, it was said, swept the grounds and collected filth and dirt.
This caused illness.
The skirts were voluminous and difficult to handle.
They hampered movement and prevented women from working and earning.
Reform of the dress, it was said, would change the position of women.
If clothes were comfortable and convenient, then women could work, earn their living, and become independent.
In the 1870s, the National Woman Suffrage Association headed by Mrs Stanton, and the American Woman Suffrage Association dominated by Lucy Stone both campaigned for dress reform.
The argument was: simplify dress, shorten skirts, and abandon corsets.
On both sides of the Atlantic, there was now a movement for rational dress reform.
The reformers did not immediately succeed in changing social values.
They had to face ridicule and hostility.
Conservatives everywhere opposed change.
They lamented that women who gave up traditional norms of dressing no longer looked beautiful, and lost their femininty and grace.
Faced with persistent attacks, many women reformers changed back into traditional clothes to conform to conventions.
about radical changes in women’s clothing.
By the end of the nineteenth century, however, change was clearly in the air.
Ideals of beauty and styles of clothing were both transformed under a variety of pressures.
People began accepting the ideas of reformers they had earlier ridiculed.
With new times came new values.
New Times
What were these new values?
What created the pressure for change?
Many changes were made possible in Britain due to the introduction of new materials and technologies.
Other changes came about because of the two world wars and the new working conditions for women.
Let us retrace our steps a few centuries to see what these changes were.
New Materials
Before the seventeenth century, most ordinary women in Britain possessed very few clothes made of flax, linen or wool, which were difficult to clean.
After 1600, trade with India brought cheap, beautiful and easy-to-maintain Indian chintzes within the reach of many Europeans who could now increase the size of their wardrobes.
Then, during the Industrial Revolution, in the nineteenth century, Britain began the mass manufacture of cotton textiles which it exported to many parts of the world, including India.
Cotton clothes became more accessible to a wider section of people in Europe.
By the early twentieth century, artificial fibres made clothes cheaper still and easier to wash and maintain.
In the late 1870s, heavy, restrictive underclothes, which had created such a storm in the pages of women’s magazines, were gradually discarded.
Clothes got lighter, shorter and simpler.
Yet until 1914, clothes were ankle length, as they had been since the thirteenth century.
By 1915, however, the hemline of the skirt rose dramatically to mid-calf.
The War
Changes in women’s clothing came about as a result of the two World wars.
Many European women stopped wearing jewellery and luxurious clothes.
As upper-class women mixed with other classes, social barriers were eroded and women began to dress in similar ways.
Clothes got shorter during the First World War (1914-1918) out of practical necessity.
By 1917, over 700,000 women in Britain were employed in ammunition factories.
They wore a working uniform of blouse and trousers with accessories such as scarves, which was later replaced by khaki overalls and caps.
Bright colours faded from sight and only sober colours were worn as the war dragged on.
Thus clothes became plainer and simpler.
Skirts became shorter.
Soon trousers became a vital part of Western women’s clothing, giving them greater freedom of movement.
Most important, women took to cutting their hair short for convenience.
By the twentieth century, a plain and austere style came to reflect seriousness and professionalism.
New schools for children emphasised the importance of plain dressing, and discouraged ornamentation.
Gymnastics and games entered the school curriculum for women.
As women took to sports, they had to wear clothes that did not hamper movement.
When they went out to work they needed clothes that were comfortable and convenient.
So we see that the history of clothing is linked to the larger history of society.
We saw how clothing was defined by dominant cultural attitudes and ideals of beauty, and how these notions changed over time.
We saw how reformers and conservatives struggled to shape these ideals, and how changes within technology and economy, and the pressures of new times made people feel the need for change.
Transformations in Colonial India
During the colonial period there were significant changes in male and female clothing in India.
On the one hand this was a consequence of the influence of Western dress forms and missionary activity; on the other it was due to the effort by Indians to fashion clothing styles that embodied an indigenous tradition and culture.
Cloth and clothing in fact became very important symbols of the national movement.
A brief look at the nineteenth century changes will tell us a great deal about the transformations of the twentieth century.
When western-style clothing came into India in the nineteenth century, Indians reacted in three different ways:
One.
Many, especially men, began incorporating some elements of western-style clothing in their dress.
The wealthy Parsis of western India were among the first to adapt Western-style clothing.
Baggy trousers and the phenta (or hat) were added to long collarless coats, with boots and a walking stick to complete the look of the gentleman.
To some, Western clothes were a sign of modernity and progress.
Western-style clothing was also especially attractive to groups of dalit converts to Christianity who now found it liberating.
Here too, it was men rather than women who affected the new dress styles.
Two.
There were others who were convinced that western culture would lead to a loss of traditional cultural identity.
The use of Western- style clothes was taken as a sign of the world turning upside down.
The cartoon of the Bengali Babu shown here, mocks him for wearing Western-style boots and hat and coat along with his dhoti.
Three.
Some men resolved this dilemma by wearing Western clothes without giving up their Indian ones.
Many Bengali bureaucrats in the late nineteenth century began stocking western-style clothes for work outside the home and changed into more comfortable Indian clothes at home.
Early- twentieth- century anthropologist Verrier Elwin remembered that policemen in Poona who were going off duty would take their trousers off in the street and walk home in ‘just tunic and undergarments’.
This difference between outer and inner worlds is still observed by some men today.
Still others tried a slightly different solution to the same dilemma.
They attempted to combine Western and Indian forms of dressing.
These changes in clothing, however, had a turbulent history.
Caste Conflict and Dress Change
Though there were no formal sumptuary laws as in Europe, India had its own strict social codes of food and dress.
The caste system clearly defined what subordinate and dominant caste Hindus should wear, eat, etc., and these codes had the force of law.
Changes in clothing styles that threatened these norms therefore often created violent social reactions.
In May 1822, women of the Shanar caste were attacked by Nairs in public places in the southern princely state of Travancore, for wearing a cloth across their upper bodies.
Over subsequent decades, a violent conflict over dress codes ensued.
The Shanars (later known as Nadars), many of whom were considered a ‘subordinate caste’ and so were generally prohibited from using umbrellas and wearing shoes or golden ornaments.
Men and women were also expected to follow the local custom of never covering their upper bodies before the dominant castes.
Under the influence of Christian missionaries, Shanar women converts began in the 1820s to wear tailored blouses and cloths to cover themselves like the dominant castes.
Hindu reformers such as Ayya Vaikunder also participated in dress reform.
Soon Nairs, one of the dominant castes of the region, attacked these women in public places and tore off their upper cloths.
Complaints were also filed in court against this dress change, especially since Shanars were also refusing to render free labour for the dominant castes.
At first, the Government of Travancore issued a proclamation in 1829 ordering Shanar women ‘to abstain in future from covering the upper parts of the body.’ But this did not prevent Shanar Christian women, and even Shanar Hindus, from adopting the blouse and upper cloth.
The abolition of slavery in Travancore in 1855 led to even more frustration among the dominant castes who felt they were losing control.
In October 1859, riots broke out as Shanar women were attacked in the marketplace and stripped of their upper cloths.
Houses were looted and chapels burned.
Finally, the government issued another proclamation permitting Shanar women, whether Christian or Hindu, to wear a jacket, or cover their upper bodies ‘in any manner whatever, but not like the women of high caste’.
British Rule and Dress Codes
In different cultures, specific items of clothing often convey contrary meanings.
This frequently leads to misunderstanding and conflict.
Styles of clothing in British India changed through such conflicts.
Consider the case of the turban and the hat.
When European traders first began frequenting India, they were distinguished from the Indian ‘turban wearers’ as the ‘hat wearers.’ These two headgears not only looked different, they also signified different things.
The turban in India was not just for protection from the heat but was a sign of respectability, and could not be removed at will.
In the Western tradition, the hat had to be removed before social superiors as a sign of respect.
This cultural difference created misunderstanding.
The British were often offended if Indians did not take off their turban when they met colonial officials.
Many Indians on the other hand wore the turban to consciously assert their regional or national identity.
Another such conflict related to the wearing of shoes.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, it was customary for British officials to follow Indian etiquette and remove their footwear in the courts of ruling kings or chiefs.
Some British officials also wore Indian clothes.
But in 1830, Europeans were forbidden from wearing Indian clothes at official functions, so that the cultural identity of the white masters was not undermined.
At the same time, Indians were expected to wear Indian clothes to office and follow Indian dress codes.
In 1824 - 1828, Governor-General Amherst insisted that Indians take their shoes off as a sign of respect when they appeared before him, but this was not strictly followed.
By the mid- nineteenth century, when Lord Dalhousie was Governor- General, ‘shoe respect’ was made stricter, and Indians were made to take off their shoes when entering any government institution; only those who wore European clothes were exempted from this rule.
Many Indian government servants were increasingly uncomfortable with these rules.
In 1862, there was a famous case of defiance of the ‘shoe respect’ rule in a Surat courtroom.
Manockjee Cowasjee Entee, an assessor in the Surat Fouzdaree Adawlut, refused to take off his shoes in the court of the sessions judge.
The judge insisted that he take off his shoes as that was the Indian way of showing respect to superiors.
But Manockjee remained adamant.
He was barred entry into the courtroom and he sent a letter of protest to the Governor of Bombay.
The British insisted that since Indians took off their shoes when they entered a sacred place or home, they should do so when they entered the courtroom.
In the controversy that followed, Indians urged that taking off shoes in sacred places and at home was linked to two different questions.
One: there was the problem of dirt and filth.
Shoes collected the dirt on the road.
This dirt could not be allowed into spaces that were clean, particularly when people in Indian homes sat on the ground.
Second, leather shoes and the filth that stuck under it were seen as polluting.
But public buildings like the courtroom were different from home.
But it took many years before shoes were permitted into the courtroom.
Designing the National Dress
As nationalist feelings swept across India by the late nineteenth century, Indians began devising cultural symbols that would express the unity of the nation.
Artists looked for a national style of art.
Poets wrote national songs.
Then a debate began over the design of the national flag.
The search for a national dress was part of this move to define the cultural identity of the nation in symbolic ways.
Self-conscious experiments with dress engaged men and women of the upper classes and castes in many parts of India.
The Tagore family of Bengal experimented, beginning in the 1870s, with designs for a national dress for both men and women in India.
Rabindranath Tagore suggested that instead of combining Indian and European dress, India’s national dress should combine elements of Hindu and Muslim dress.
Thus the chapkan (a long buttoned coat) was considered the most suitable dress for men.
There were also attempts to develop a dress style that would draw on the tradition of different regions.
In the late 1870s, Jnanadanandini Devi, wife of Satyendranath Tagore, the first Indian member of the ICS, returned from Bombay to Calcutta.
She adopted the Parsi style of wearing the sari pinned to the left shoulder with a brooch, and worn with a blouse and shoes.
This was quickly adopted by Brahmo Samaji women and came to be known as the Brahmika sari.
This style gained acceptance before long among Maharashtrian and Uttar Pradesh Brahmos, as well as non-Brahmos.
However, these attempts at devising a pan-Indian style did not fully succeed.
Women of Gujarat, Kodagu, Kerala and Assam continue to wear different types of sari.
The Swadeshi Movement
You have read about the Swadeshi movement in Bengal in the first decade of the twentieth century.
If you reflect back on the movement you will realize that it was centrally linked to the politics of clothing.
You know that the British first came to trade in Indian textiles that were in great demand all over the world.
India accounted for one- fourth of the world’s manufactured goods in the seventeenth century.
There were a million weavers in Bengal alone in the middle of the eighteenth century.
However, the Industrial Revolution in Britain, which mechanised spinning and weaving and greatly increased the demand for raw materials such as cotton and indigo, changed India’s status in the world economy.
Political control of India helped the British in two ways: Indian peasants could be forced to grow crops such as indigo, and cheap British manufacture easily replaced coarser Indian one.
Large numbers of Indian weavers and spinners were left without work, and important textile weaving centres such as Murshidabad, Machilipatnam and Surat declined as demand fell.
Yet by the middle of the twentieth century, large numbers of people began boycotting British or mill-made cloth and adopting khadi, even though it was coarser, more expensive and difficult to obtain.
How did this change come about?
In 1905, Lord Curzon decided to partition Bengal to control the growing opposition to British rule.
The Swadeshi movement developed in reaction to this measure.
People were urged to boycott British goods of all kinds and start their own industries for the manufacture of goods such as matchboxes and cigarettes.
Mass protests followed, with people vowing to cleanse themselves of colonial rule.
The use of khadi was made a patriotic duty.
Women were urged to throw away their silks and glass bangles and wear simple shell bangles.
Rough homespun was glorified in songs and poems to popularise it.
The change of dress appealed largely to the upper castes and classes rather than to those who had to make do with less and could not afford the new products.
After 15 years, many among the upper classes also returned to wearing European dress.
Though many people rallied to the cause of nationalism at this time, it was almost impossible to compete with cheap British goods that had flooded the market.
Despite its limitations, the experiment with Swadeshi gave Mahatma Gandhi important ideas about using cloth as a symbolic weapon against British rule.
Mahatma Gandhi’s Experiments with Clothing
The most familiar image of Mahatma Gandhi is of him seated, bare chested and in a short dhoti, at the spinning wheel.
He made spinning on the charkha and the daily use of khadi, or coarse cloth made from homespun yarn, very powerful symbols.
These were not only symbols of self-reliance but also of resistance to the use of British mill-made cloth.
Mahatma Gandhi’s experiments with clothing sum up the changing attitude to dress in the Indian subcontinent.
As a boy from a Gujarati Bania family, he usually wore a shirt with a dhoti or pyjama, and sometimes a coat.
When he went to London to study law as a boy of 19 in 1888, he cut off the tuft on his head and dressed in a Western suit so that he would not be laughed at.
On his return, he continued to wear Western suits, topped with a turban.
As a lawyer in Johannesburg, South Africa in the 1890s, he still wore Western clothes.
Soon he decided that dressing ‘unsuitably’ was a more powerful political statement.
In Durban in 1913, Gandhi first appeared in a lungi and kurta with his head shaved as a sign of mourning to protest against the shooting of Indian coal miners.
On his return to India in 1915, he decided to dress like a Kathiawadi peasant.
Only in 1921 did he adopt the short dhoti, the form of dress he wore until his death.
On 22 September 1921, a year after launching the non-cooperation movement, which sought swaraj in one year, he announced: ‘I propose to discard at least up to 31st of October my topi and vest and to content myself with a loincloth, and a chaddar whenever necessary for protection of my body.
I adopt the change because I have always hesitated to advise anything I may not be prepared to follow ...’
At this time, he did not want to use this dress all his life and only wanted to ‘experiment for a month or two’.
But soon he saw this as his duty to the poor, and he never wore any other dress.
He consciously rejected the well-known clothes of the Indian ascetic and adopted the dress of the poorest Indian.
Khadi, white and coarse, was to him a sign of purity, of simplicity, and of poverty.
Wearing it became also a symbol of nationalism, a rejection of Western mill- made cloth.
He wore the short dhoti without a shirt when he went to England for the Round Table Conference in 1931.
He refused to compromise and wore it even before King George V at Buckingham Palace.
When he was asked by journalists whether he was wearing enough clothes to go before the King, he joked that that ‘the King had enough on for both of us’!
Not All could Wear Khadi
Mahatma Gandhi’s dream was to clothe the whole nation in khadi.
He felt khadi would be a means of erasing difference between religions, classes, etc.
But was it easy for others to follow in his footsteps?
Was such a unity possible?
Not many could take to the single peasant loincloth as he had.
Nor did all want to.
Here are some examples of other responses to Mahatma Gandhi’s call:
Nationalists such as Motilal Nehru, a successful barrister from Allahabad, gave up his expensive Western-style suits and adopted the Indian dhoti and kurta.
But these were not made of coarse cloth.
Those who had been deprived by caste norms for centuries were attracted to Western dress styles.
Therefore, unlike Mahatma Gandhi, other nationalists such as Babasaheb Ambedkar never gave up the Western-style suit.
Many Dalits began in the early 1910s to wear three- piece suits, and shoes and socks on all public occasions, as a political statement of self-respect.
A woman who wrote to Mahatma Gandhi from Maharashtra in 1928 said, ‘A year ago, I heard you speaking on the extreme necessity of every one of us wearing khadi and thereupon decided to adopt it.
But we are poor people, My husband says khadi is costly.
Belonging as I do to Maharashtra, I wear a sari nine yards long ... (and) the elders will not hear of a reduction (to six yards).’ Other women, like Sarojini Naidu and Kamala Nehru, wore coloured saris with designs, instead of coarse, white homespun.
Conclusion
Changes in styles of clothing are thus linked up with shifts in cultural tastes and notions of beauty, with changes within the economy and society, and with issues of social and political conflict.
So when we see clothing styles alter we need to ask: why do these changes take place?
What do they tell us about society and its history?
What can they tell us about changes in tastes and technologies, markets and industries?
In the Mountains
Even today the Gujjar Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir are great herders of goat and sheep.
Many of them migrated to this region in the nineteenth century in search of pastures for their animals.
Gradually, over the decades, they established themselves in the area, and moved annually between their summer and winter grazing grounds.
In winter, when the high mountains were covered with snow, they lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik range.
The dry scrub forests here provided pasture for their herds.
By the end of April they began their northern march for their summer grazing grounds.
Several households came together for this journey, forming what is known as a kafila.
They crossed the Pir Panjal passes and entered the valley of Kashmir.
With the onset of summer, the snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green.
The variety of grasses that sprouted provided rich nutritious forage for the animal herds.
By end September the Bakarwals were on the move again, this time on their downward journey, back to their winter base.
When the high mountains were covered with snow, the herds were grazed in the low hills.
In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement.
They too spent their winter in the low hills of Siwalik range, grazing their flocks in scrub forests.
By April they moved north and spent the summer in Lahul and Spiti.
When the snow melted and the high passes were clear, many of them moved on to higher mountain meadows.
By September they began their return movement.
On the way they stopped once again in the villages of Lahul and Spiti, reaping their summer harvest and sowing their winter crop.
Then they descended with their flock to their winter grazing ground on the Siwalik hills.
Next April, once again, they began their march with their goats and sheep, to the summer meadows.
Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the winter, and went up to the high meadows – the bugyals – in summer.
Many of them were originally from Jammu and came to the UP hills in the nineteenth century in search of good pastures.
This pattern of cyclical movement between summer and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral communities of the Himalayas, including the Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris.
All of them had to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use of available pastures in different places.
When the pasture was exhausted or unusable in one place they moved their herds and flock to new areas.
This continuous movement also allowed the pastures to recover; it prevented their overuse.
On the Plateaus, Plains and Deserts
Not all pastoralists operated in the mountains.
They were also to be found in the plateaus, plains and deserts of India.
Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra.
In the early twentieth century their population in this region was estimated to be 467,000.
Most of them were shepherds, some were blanket weavers, and still others were buffalo herders.
The Dhangar shepherds stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the monsoon.
This was a semi-arid region with low rainfall and poor soil.
It was covered with thorny scrub.
Nothing but dry crops like bajra could be sown here.
In the monsoon this tract became a vast grazing ground for the Dhangar flocks.
By October the Dhangars harvested their bajra and started on their move west.
After a march of about a month they reached the Konkan.
This was a flourishing agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil.
Here the shepherds were welcomed by Konkani peasants.
After the kharif harvest was cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the rabi harvest.
Dhangar flocks manured the fields and fed on the stubble.
The Konkani peasants also gave supplies of rice which the shepherds took back to the plateau where grain was scarce.
With the onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry plateau.
The sheep could not tolerate the wet monsoon conditions.
In Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, again, the dry central plateau was covered with stone and grass, inhabited by cattle, goat and sheep herders.
The Gollas herded cattle.
The Kurumas and Kurubas reared sheep and goats and sold woven blankets.
They lived near the woods, cultivated small patches of land, engaged in a variety of petty trades and took care of their herds.
Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and dry season.
In the dry season they moved to the coastal tracts, and left when the rains came.
Only buffaloes liked the swampy, wet conditions of the coastal areas during the monsoon months.
Other herds had to be shifted to the dry plateau at this time.
Banjaras were yet another well-known group of graziers.
They were to be found in the villages of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
In search of good pastureland for their cattle, they moved over long distances, selling plough cattle and other goods to villagers in exchange for grain and fodder.
In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas.
The rainfall in the region was meagre and uncertain.
On cultivated land, harvests fluctuated every year.
Over vast stretches no crop could be grown.
So the Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralism.
During the monsoons, the Raikas of Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Bikaner stayed in their home villages, where pasture was available.
By October, when these grazing grounds were dry and exhausted, they moved out in search of other pasture and water, and returned again during the next monsoon.
One group of Raikas – known as the Maru (desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared sheep and goat.
So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a careful consideration of a host of factors.
They had to judge how long the herds could stay in one area, and know where they could find water and pasture.
They needed to calculate the timing of their movements, and ensure that they could move through different territories.
They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil.
They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade, and herding – to make their living.
How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule?
Colonial Rule and Pastoral Life
Under colonial rule, the life of pastoralists changed dramatically.
Their grazing grounds shrank, their movements were regulated, and the revenue they had to pay increased.
Their agricultural stock declined and their trades and crafts were adversely affected.
How?
First, the colonial state wanted to transform all grazing lands into cultivated farms.
Land revenue was one of the main sources of its finance.
By expanding cultivation it could increase its revenue collection.
It could at the same time produce more jute, cotton, wheat and other agricultural produce that were required in England.
To colonial officials all uncultivated land appeared to be unproductive: it produced neither revenue nor agricultural produce.
It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought under cultivation.
From the mid-nineteenth century, Waste Land Rules were enacted in various parts of the country.
By these Rules uncultivated lands were taken over and given to select individuals.
These individuals were granted various concessions and encouraged to settle these lands.
Some of them were made headmen of villages in the newly cleared areas.
In most areas the lands taken over were actually grazing tracts used regularly by pastoralists.
So expansion of cultivation inevitably meant the decline of pastures and a problem for pastoralists.
Second, by the mid-nineteenth century, various Forest Acts were also being enacted in the different provinces.
Through these Acts some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’.
No pastoralist was allowed access to these forests.
Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’.
In these, some customary grazing rights of pastoralists were granted but their movements were severely restricted.
The colonial officials believed that grazing destroyed the saplings and young shoots of trees that germinated on the forest floor.
The herds trampled over the saplings and munched away the shoots.
This prevented new trees from growing.
These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists.
They were now prevented from entering many forests that had earlier provided valuable forage for their cattle.
Even in the areas they were allowed entry, their movements were regulated.
They needed a permit for entry.
The timing of their entry and departure was specified, and the number of days they could spend in the forest was limited.
Pastoralists could no longer remain in an area even if forage was available, the grass was succulent and the undergrowth in the forest was ample.
They had to move because the Forest Department permits that had been issued to them now ruled their lives.
The permit specified the periods in which they could be legally within a forest.
If they overstayed they were liable to fines.
Third, British officials were suspicious of nomadic people.
They distrusted mobile craftsmen and traders who hawked their goods in villages, and pastoralists who changed their places of residence every season, moving in search of good pastures for their herds.
The colonial government wanted to rule over a settled population.
They wanted the rural people to live in villages, in fixed places with fixed rights on particular fields.
Such a population was easy to identify and control.
Those who were settled were seen as peaceable and law abiding; those who were nomadic were considered to be criminal.
In 1871, the colonial government in India passed the Criminal Tribes Act.
By this Act many communities of craftsmen, traders and pastoralists were classified as Criminal Tribes.
They were stated to be criminal by nature and birth.
Once this Act came into force, these communities were expected to live only in notified village settlements.
They were not allowed to move out without a permit.
The village police kept a continuous watch on them.
Fourth, to expand its revenue income, the colonial government looked for every possible source of taxation.
So tax was imposed on land, on canal water, on salt, on trade goods, and even on animals.
Pastoralists had to pay tax on every animal they grazed on the pastures.
In most pastoral tracts of India, grazing tax was introduced in the mid-nineteenth century.
The tax per head of cattle went up rapidly and the system of collection was made increasingly efficient.
In the decades between the 1850s and 1880s the right to collect the tax was auctioned out to contractors.
These contractors tried to extract as high a tax as they could to recover the money they had paid to the state and earn as much profit as they could within the year.
By the 1880s the government began collecting taxes directly from the pastoralists.
Each of them was given a pass.
To enter a grazing tract, a cattle herder had to show the pass and pay the tax.
The number of cattle heads he had and the amount of tax he paid was entered on the pass.
How Did these Changes Affect the Lives of Pastoralists?
These measures led to a serious shortage of pastures.
When grazing lands were taken over and turned into cultivated fields, the available area of pastureland declined.
Similarly, the reservation of forests meant that shepherds and cattle herders could no longer freely pasture their cattle in the forests.
As pasturelands disappeared under the plough, the existing animal stock had to feed on whatever grazing land remained.
This led to continuous intensive grazing of these pastures.
Usually nomadic pastoralists grazed their animals in one area and moved to another area.
These pastoral movements allowed time for the natural restoration of vegetation growth.
When restrictions were imposed on pastoral movements, grazing lands came to be continuously used and the quality of patures declined.
This in turn created a further shortage of forage for animals and the deterioration of animal stock.
Underfed cattle died in large numbers during scarcities and famines.
How Did the Pastoralists Cope with these Changes?
Pastoralists reacted to these changes in a variety of ways.
Some reduced the number of cattle in their herds, since there was not enough pasture to feed large numbers.
Others discovered new pastures when movement to old grazing grounds became difficult.
After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of the Indus, as they had done earlier.
The new political boundaries between India and Pakistan stopped their movement.
So they had to find new places to go.
In recent years they have been migrating to Haryana where sheep can graze on agricultural fields after the harvests are cut.
This is the time that the fields need manure that the animals provide.
Over the years, some richer pastoralists began buying land and settling down, giving up their nomadic life.
Some became settled peasants cultivating land, others took to more extensive trading.
Many poor pastoralists, on the other hand, borrowed money from moneylenders to survive.
At times they lost their cattle and sheep and became labourers, working on fields or in small towns.
Yet, pastoralists not only continue to survive, in many regions their numbers have expanded over recent decades.
When pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the changes in the modern world.
Many ecologists believe that in dry regions and in the mountains, pastoralism is still ecologically the most viable form of life.
Such changes were not experienced only by pastoral communities in India.
In many other parts of the world, new laws and settlement patterns forced pastoral communities to alter their lives.
How did pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the modern world?
Pastoralism in Africa
Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population lives.
Even today, over 22 million Africans depend on some form of pastoral activity for their livelihood.
They include communities like Bedouins, Berbers, Maasai, Somali, Boran and Turkana.
Most of them now live in the semi-arid grasslands or arid deserts where rainfed agriculture is difficult.
They raise cattle, camels, goats, sheep and donkeys; and they sell milk, meat, animal skin and wool.
Some also earn through trade and transport, others combine pastoral activity with agriculture; still others do a variety of odd jobs to supplement their meagre and uncertain earnings from pastoralism.
Like pastoralists in India, the lives of African pastoralists have changed dramatically over the colonial and post-colonial periods.
Where have the Grazing Lands Gone?
One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of their grazing lands.
Before colonial times, Maasailand stretched over a vast area from north Kenya to the steppes of northern Tanzania.
In the late nineteenth century, European imperial powers scrambled for territorial possessions in Africa, slicing up the region into different colonies.
In 1885, Maasailand was cut into half with an international boundary between British Kenya and German Tanganyika.
Subsequently, the best grazing lands were gradually taken over for white settlement and the Maasai were pushed into a small area in south Kenya and north Tanzania.
The Maasai lost about 60 per cent of their pre-colonial lands.
They were confined to an arid zone with uncertain rainfall and poor pastures.
From the late nineteenth century, the British colonial government in east Africa also encouraged local peasant communities to expand cultivation.
As cultivation expanded, pasturelands were turned into cultivated fields.
In pre-colonial times, the Maasai pastoralists had dominated their agricultural neighbours both economically and politically.
By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed.
Large areas of grazing land were also turned into game reserves like the Maasai Mara and Samburu National Park in Kenya and Serengeti Park in Tanzania.
Pastoralists were not allowed to enter these reserves; they could neither hunt animals nor graze their herds in these areas.
Very often these reserves were in areas that had traditionally been regular grazing grounds for Maasai herds.
The Serengeti National Park, for instance, was created over 14,760 km.
of Maasai grazing land.
The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined within.
Continuous grazing within a small area inevitably meant a deterioration of the quality of pastures.
Fodder was always in short supply.
Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem.
The Borders are Closed
In the nineteenth century, African pastoralists could move over vast areas in search of pastures.
When the pastures were exhausted in one place they moved to a different area to graze their cattle.
From the late nineteenth century, the colonial government began imposing various restrictions on their mobility.
Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within the confines of special reserves.
The boundaries of these reserves became the limits within which they could now move.
They were not allowed to move out with their stock without special permits.
And it was difficult to get permits without trouble and harassment.
Those found guilty of disobeying the rules were severely punished.
Pastoralists were also not allowed to enter the markets in white areas.
In many regions, they were prohibited from participating in any form of trade.
White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be minimised.
Cutting off all links was, however, never really possible, because white colonists had to depend on black labour to bore mines and, build roads and towns.
The new territorial boundaries and restrictions imposed on them suddenly changed the lives of pastoralists.
This adversely affected both their pastoral and trading activities.
Earlier, pastoralists not only looked after animal herds but traded in various products.
The restrictions under colonial rule did not entirely stop their trading activities but they were now subject to various restrictions.
When Pastures Dry
Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere.
When rains fail and pastures are dry, cattle are likely to starve unless they can be moved to areas where forage is available.
That is why, traditionally, pastoralists are nomadic; they move from place to place.
This nomadism allows them to survive bad times and avoid crises.
But from the colonial period, the Maasai were bound down to a fixed area, confined within a reserve, and prohibited from moving in search of pastures.
They were cut off from the best grazing lands and forced to live within a semi-arid tract prone to frequent droughts.
Since they could not shift their cattle to places where pastures were available, large numbers of Maasai cattle died of starvation and disease in these years of drought.
An enquiry in 1930 showed that the Maasai in Kenya possessed 720,000 cattle, 820,000 sheep and 171,000 donkeys.
In just two years of severe drought, 1933 and 1934, over half the cattle in the Maasai Reserve died.
As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts increased in intensity.
The frequent bad years led to a steady decline of the animal stock of the pastoralists.
Not All were Equally Affected
To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced a series of measures that had important implications.
They appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were made responsible for the affairs of the tribe.
The British imposed various restrictions on raiding and warfare.
Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and warriors was adversely affected.
The chiefs appointed by the colonial government often accumulated wealth over time.
They had a regular income with which they could buy animals, goods and land.
They lent money to poor neighbours who needed cash to pay taxes.
Many of them began living in towns, and became involved in trade.
Their wives and children stayed back in the villages to look after the animals.
These chiefs managed to survive the devastations of war and drought.
They had both pastoral and non-pastoral income, and could buy animals when their stock was depleted.
But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only on their livestock was different.
Most often, they did not have the resources to tide over bad times.
In times of war and famine, they lost nearly everything.
They had to go looking for work in the towns.
Some eked out a living as charcoal burners, others did odd jobs.
The lucky could get more regular work in road or building construction.
The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels.
First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down entirely.
Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor pastoralists developed.
Conclusion
So we see that pastoral communities in different parts of the world are affected in a variety of different ways by changes in the modern world.
New laws and new borders affect the patterns of their movement.
With increasing restrictions on their mobility, pastoralists find it difficult to move in search of pastures.
As pasture lands disappear grazing becomes a problem, while pastures that remain deteriorate through continuous over grazing.
Times of drought become times of crises, when cattle die in large numbers.
Modern
Yet, pastoralists do adapt to new times.
They change the paths of their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in the management of forests and water resources.
Pastoralists are not relics of the past.
They are not people who have no place in the modern world.
Environmentalists and economists have increasingly come to recognise that pastoral nomadism is a form of life that is perfectly suited to many hilly and dry regions of the world.
On 1 June 1830, a farmer in the north-west of England found his barn and haystack reduced to ashes by a fire that started at night.
In the months that followed, cases of such fire were reported from numerous districts.
At times only the rick was burnt, at other times the entire farmhouse.
Then on the night of 28 August 1830, a threshing machine of a farmer was destroyed by labourers in East Kent in England.
In the subsequent two years, riots spread over southern England and about 387 threshing machines were broken.
Through this period, farmers received threatening letters urging them to stop using machines that deprived workmen of their livelihood.
Most of these letters were signed in the name of Captain Swing.
Alarmed landlords feared attacks by armed bands at night, and many destroyed their own machines.
Government action was severe.
Those suspected of rioting were rounded up.
1, 976 prisoners were tried, nine men were hanged, 505 transported – over 450 of them to Australia – and 644 put behind bars.
Captain Swing was a mythic name used in these letters.
But who were the Swing rioters?
Why did they break threshing machines?
What were they protesting against?
To answer these questions, we need to trace the developments in English agriculture in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The Time of Open fields and Commons Over the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the English countryside changed dramatically.
Before this time in large parts of England the countryside was open.
It was not partitioned into enclosed lands privately owned by landlords.
Peasants cultivated on strips of land around the village they lived in.
At the beginning of each year, at a public meeting, each villager was allocated a number of strips to cultivate.
Usually, these strips were of varying quality and often located in different places, not next to each other.
The effort was to ensure that everyone had a mix of good and bad land.
Beyond these strips of cultivation lay the common land.
All villagers had access to the commons.
Here they pastured their cows and grazed their sheep, collected fuelwood for fire and berries and fruit for food.
They fished in the rivers and ponds, and hunted rabbit in common forests.
For the poor, the common land was essential for survival.
It supplemented their meagre income, sustained their cattle, and helped them tide over bad times when crops failed.
In some parts of England, this economy of open fields and common lands had started changing from about the sixteenth century.
When the price of wool went up in the world market in the sixteenth century, rich farmers wanted to expand wool production to earn profits.
They were eager to improve their sheep breeds and ensure good feed for them.
They were keen on controlling large areas of land in compact blocks to allow improved breeding.
So they began dividing and enclosing common land and building hedges around their holdings to separate their property from that of others.
They drove out villagers who had small cottages on the commons, and they prevented the poor from entering the enclosed fields.
Till the middle of the eighteenth century the enclosure movement proceeded very slowly.
The early enclosures were usually created by individual landlords.
They were not supported by the state or the church.
After the mid-eighteenth century, however, the enclosure movement swept through the countryside, changing the English landscape for ever.
Between 1750 and 1850, 6 million acres of land was enclosed.
The British Parliament no longer watched this process from a distance.
It passed 4,000 Acts legalising these enclosures.
New Demands for Grain
Why was there such a frantic effort to enclose lands?
What did the enclosures imply?
The new enclosures were different from the old.
Unlike the sixteenth-century enclosures that promoted sheep farming, the land being enclosed in the late eighteenth century was for grain production.
The new enclosures were happening in a different context; they became a sign of a changing time.
From the mid-eighteenth century, the English population expanded rapidly.
Between 1750 and 1900, it multiplied over four times, mounting from 7 million in 1750 to 21 million in 1850 and 30 million in 1900.
This meant an increased demand for foodgrains to feed the population.
Moreover, Britain at this time was industrialising.
More and more people began to live and work in urban areas.
Men from rural areas migrated to towns in search of jobs.
To survive they had to buy foodgrains in the market.
As the urban population grew, the market for foodgrains expanded, and when demand increased rapidly, foodgrain prices rose.
By the end of the eighteenth century, France was at war with England.
This disrupted trade and the import of foodgrains from Europe.
Prices of foodgrains in England sky rocketed, encouraging landowners to enclose lands and enlarge the area under grain cultivation.
Profits flowed in and landowners pressurised the Parliament to pass the Enclosure Acts.
The Age of Enclosures
There is one dramatic fact that makes the period after the 1780s different from any earlier period in English history.
In earlier times, rapid population growth was most often followed by a period of food shortages.
Food-grain production in the past had not expanded as rapidly as the population.
In the nineteenth century this did not happen in England.
Grain production grew as quickly as population.
Even though the population increased rapidly, in 1868 England was producing about 80 per cent of the food it consumed.
The rest was imported.
This increase in food-grain production was made possible not by any radical innovations in agricultural technology, but by bringing new lands under cultivation.
Landlords sliced up pasturelands, carved up open fields, cut up forest commons, took over marshes, and turned larger and larger areas into agricultural fields.
Farmers at this time continued to use the simple innovations in agriculture that had become common by the early eighteenth century.
It was in about the 1660s that farmers in many parts of England began growing turnip and clover.
They soon discovered that planting these crops improved the soil and made it more fertile.
Turnip was, moreover, a good fodder crop relished by cattle.
So farmers began cultivating turnips and clover regularly.
These crops became part of the cropping system.
Later findings showed that these crops had the capacity to increase the nitrogen content of the soil.
Nitrogen was important for crop growth.
Cultivation of the same soil over a few years depleted the nitrogen in the soil and reduced its fertility.
By restoring nitrogen, turnip and clover made the soil fertile once again.
We find that farmers in the early nineteenth century used much the same method to improve agriculture on a more regular basis.
Enclosures were now seen as necessary to make long-term investments on land and plan crop rotations to improve the soil.
Enclosures also allowed the richer landowners to expand the land under their control and produce more for the market.
What Happened To the Poor?
Enclosures filled the pockets of landlords.
But what happened to those who depended on the commons for their survival?
When fences came up, the enclosed land became the exclusive property of one landowner.
The poor could no longer collect their firewood from the forests, or graze their cattle on the commons.
They could no longer collect apples and berries, or hunt small animals for meat.
Nor could they gather the stalks that lay on the fields after the crops were cut.
Everything belonged to the landlords, everything had a price which the poor could not afford to pay.
In places where enclosures happened on an extensive scale – particularly the Midlands and the counties around – the poor were displaced from the land.
They found their customary rights gradually disappearing.
Deprived of their rights and driven off the land, they tramped in search of work.
From the Midlands, they moved to the southern counties of England.
This was a region that was most intensively cultivated, and there was a great demand for agricultural labourers.
But nowhere could the poor find secure jobs.
Earlier, it was common for labourers to live with landowners.
They ate at the master’s table, and helped their master through the year, doing a variety of odd jobs.
By 1800 this practice was disappearing.
Labourers were being paid wages and employed only during harvest time.
As landowners tried to increase their profits, they cut the amount they had to spend on their workmen.
Work became insecure, Source C employment uncertain, income unstable.
For a very large part of the year the poor had no work.
The Introduction of Threshing Machines
During the Napoleonic Wars, prices of foodgrains were high and farmers expanded production vigorously.
Fearing a shortage of labour, they began buying the new threshing machines that had come into the market.They complained of the insolence of labourers, their drinking habits, and the difficulty of making them work.
The machines, they thought, would help them reduce their dependence on labourers.
After the Napoleonic Wars had ended, thousands of soldiers returned to the villages.
They needed alternative jobs to survive.
But this was a time when grain from Europe began flowing into England, prices declined, and an Agricultural Depression set in (see prices in Fig.2).
Anxious, landowners began reducing the area they cultivated and demanded that the imports of crops be stopped.
They tried to cut wages and the number of workmen they employed.
The unemployed poor tramped from village to village, and those with uncertain jobs lived in fear of a loss of their livelihood.
The Captain Swing riots spread in the countryside at this time.
For the poor the threshing machines had become a sign of bad times.
Conclusion
The coming of modern agriculture in England thus meant many different changes.
The open fields disappeared, and the customary rights of peasants were undermined.
The richer farmers expanded grain production, sold this grain in the world market, made profits, and became powerful.
The poor left their villages in large numbers.
Some went from the Midlands to the Southern counties where jobs were available, others to the cities.
The income of labourers became unstable, their jobs insecure, their livelihood precarious.
Bread Basket and Dust Bowl
Now let us travel across the Atlantic to the USA.
Let us see how modern agriculture developed there, how the USA became the bread basket of the world, and what this meant to the rural people of America.
At the time that common fields were being enclosed in England at the end of the eighteenth century, settled agriculture had not developed on any extensive scale in the USA.
Forests covered over 800 million acres and grasslands 600 million acres.
Fig.5 will give you some idea of what the natural vegetation was like at the time.
Most of the landscape was not under the control of white Americans.
Till the 1780s, white American settlements were confined to a small narrow strip of coastal land in the east.
If you travelled through the country at that time you would have met various Native American groups.
Several of them were nomadic, some were settled.
Many of them lived only by hunting, gathering and fishing; others cultivated corn, beans, tobacco and pumpkin.
Still others were expert trappers through whom European traders had secured their supplies of beaver fur since the sixteenth century.
In Fig.5 you can see the location of the different tribes in the early eighteenth century.
By the early twentieth century, this landscape had transformed radically.
White Americans had moved westward and established control up to the west coast, displacing local tribes and carving out the entire landscape into different agricultural belts.
The USA had come to dominate the world market in agricultural produce.
How did this change come about?
Who were the new settlers?
How did the spread of cultivation shape the lives of the Indian groups who had once lived there?
The Westward Move and Wheat Cultivation
The story of agrarian expansion is closely connected to the westward movement of the white settlers who took over the land.
After the American War of Independence from 1775 to 1783 and the formation of the United States of America, the white Americans began to move westward.
By the time Thomas Jefferson became President of the USA in 1800, over 700,000 white settlers had moved on to the Appalachian plateau through the passes.
Seen from the east coast, America seemed to be a land of promise.
Its wilderness could be turned into cultivated fields.
Forest timber could be cut for export, animals hunted for skin, mountains mined for gold and minerals.
But this meant that the American Indians had to be cleared from the land.
In the decades after 1800 the US government committed itself to a policy of driving the American Indians westward, first beyond the river Mississippi, and then further west.
Numerous wars were waged in which Indians were massacred and many of their villages burnt.
The Indians resisted, won many victories in wars, but were ultimately forced to sign treaties, give up their land and move westward.
As the Indians retreated, the settlers poured in.
They came in successive waves.
They settled on the Appalachian plateau by the first decade of the eighteenth century, and then moved into the Mississippi valley between 1820 and 1850.
They slashed and burnt forests, pulled out the stumps, cleared the land for cultivation, and built log cabins in the forest clearings.
Then they cleared larger areas, and erected fences around the fields.
They ploughed the land and sowed corn and wheat.
In the early years, the fertile soil produced good crops.
When the soil became impoverished and exhausted in one place, the migrants would move further west, to explore new lands and raise a new crop.
It was, however, only after the 1860s that settlers swept into the Great Plains across the River Mississippi.
In subsequent decades this region became a major wheat-producing area of America.
The Wheat Farmers
From the late nineteenth century, there was a dramatic expansion of wheat production in the USA.
The urban population in the USA was growing and the export market was becoming ever bigger.
As the demand increased, wheat prices rose, encouraging farmers to produce wheat.
The spread of the railways made it easy to transport the grain from the wheat-growing regions to the eastern coast for export.
By the early twentieth century the demand became even higher, and during the First World War the world market boomed.
Russian supplies of wheat were cut off and the USA had to feed Europe.
US President Wilson called upon farmers to respond to the need of the time.
‘Plant more wheat, wheat will win the war,’ he said.
In 1910, about 45 million acres of land in the USA was under wheat.
Nine years later, the area had expanded to 74 million acres, an increase of about 65 per cent.
Most of the increase was in the Great Plains where new areas were being ploughed to extend cultivation.
In many cases, big farmers – the wheat barons – controlled as much as 2,000 to 3,000 acres of land individually.
The Coming of New Technology
This dramatic expansion was made possible by new technology.
Through the nineteenth century, as the settlers moved into new habitats and new lands, they modified their implements to meet their requirements.
When they entered the mid-western prairie, the simple ploughs the farmers had used in the eastern coastal areas of the USA proved ineffective.
The prairie was covered with a thick mat of grass with tough roots.
To break the sod and turn the soil over, a variety of new ploughs were devised locally, some of them 12 feet long.
Their front rested on small wheels and they were hitched on to six yokes of oxen or horses.
By the early twentieth century, farmers in the Great Plains were breaking the ground with tractors and disk ploughs, clearing vast stretches for wheat cultivation.
Once the crop had ripened it had to be harvested.
Before the 1830s, the grain used to be harvested with a cradle or sickle.
At harvest time, hundreds of men and women could be seen in the fields cutting the crop.
In1831, Cyrus McCormick invented the first mechanical reaper which could cut in one day as much as five men could cut with cradles and 16 men with sickles.
By the early twentieth century, most farmers were using combined harvesters to cut grain.
With one of these machines, 500 acres of wheat could be harvested in two weeks.
For the big farmers of the Great Plains these machines had many attractions.
The prices of wheat were high and the demand seemed limitless.
The new machines allowed these big farmers to rapidly clear large tracts, break up the soil, remove the grass and prepare the ground for cultivation.
The work could be done quickly and with a minimal number of hands.
With power-driven machinery, four men could plough, seed and harvest 2,000 to 4,000 acres of wheat in a season.
What Happened to the Poor?
For the poorer farmers, machines brought misery.
Many of them bought these machines, imagining that wheat prices would remain high and profits would flow in.
If they had no money, the banks offered loans.
Those who borrowed found it difficult to pay back their debts.
Many of them deserted their farms and looked for jobs elsewhere.
But jobs were difficult to find.
Mechanisation had reduced the need for labour.
And the boom of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries seemed to have come to an end by the mid- 1920s.
After that, most farmers faced trouble.
Production had expanded so rapidly during the war and post-war years that that there was a large surplus.
Unsold stocks piled up, storehouses overflowed with grain, and vast amounts of corn and wheat were turned into animal feed.
Wheat prices fell and export markets collapsed.
This created the grounds for the Great Agrarian Depression of the 1930s that ruined wheat farmers everywhere.
Dust Bowl
The expansion of wheat agriculture in the Great Plains created other problems.
In the 1930s, terrifying duststorms began to blow over the southern plains.
Black blizzards rolled in, very often 7,000 to 8,000 feet high, rising like monstrous waves of muddy water.
They came day after day, year after year, through the 1930s.
As the skies darkened, and the dust swept in, people were blinded and choked.
Cattle were suffocated to death, their lungs caked with dust and mud.
Sand buried fences, covered fields, and coated the surfaces of rivers till the fish died.
Dead bodies of birds and animals were strewn all over the landscape.
Tractors and machines that had ploughed the earth and harvested the wheat in the 1920s were now clogged with dust, damaged beyond repair.
What had gone wrong?
Why these duststorms?
In part they came because the early 1930s were years of persistent drought.
The rains failed year after year, and temperatures soared.
The wind blew with ferocious speed.
But ordinary duststorms became black blizzards only because the entire landscape had been ploughed over, stripped of all grass that held it together.
When wheat cultivation had expanded dramatically in the early twentieth century, zealous farmers had recklessly uprooted all vegetation, and tractors had turned the soil over, and broken the sod into dust.
The whole region had become a dust bowl.
The American dream of a land of plenty had turned into a nightmare.
The settlers had thought that they could conquer the entire landscape, turn all land over to growing crops that could yield profits.
After the 1930s, they realized that they had to respect the ecological conditions of each region.
The Indian Farmer and Opium Production
Let us now move to India and see what was happening in the Indian countryside in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
As you know, British rule was gradually established in India after the Battle of Plassey (1757).
Over the period of colonial rule, the rural landscape was radically transformed.
The British saw land revenue as a major source of government income.
To build the resources of the state, efforts were made to impose a regular system of land revenue, increase revenue rates, and expand the area under cultivation.
As cultivation expanded, the area under forests and pastures declined.
All this created many problems for peasants and pastoralists.
They found their access to forests and grazing lands increasingly restricted by rules and regulations.
And they struggled to meet the pressures of government revenue demand.
In the colonial period, rural India also came to produce a range of crops for the world market.
In the early nineteenth century, indigo and opium were two of the major commercial crops.
By the end of the century, peasants were producing sugarcane, cotton, jute, wheat and several other crops for export, to feed the population of urban Europe and to supply the mills of Lancashire and Manchester in England.
How did Indian cultivators respond to their entry into the modern world of international commerce and trade?
Let us look at the history of one crop – opium – to get an idea of what colonial rule meant to peasants, and how the market operated in the colonies.
A Taste for Tea: The Trade with China Farmers
The history of opium production in India was linked up with the story of British trade with China.
In the late eighteenth century, the English East India Company was buying tea and silk from China for sale in England.
As tea became a popular English drink, the tea trade became more and more important.
In 1785, about 15 million pounds of tea was being imported into England.
By 1830, the figure had jumped to over 30 million pounds.
In fact, the profits of the East India Company came to depend on the tea trade.
This created a problem.
England at this time produced nothing that could be easily sold in China.
The Confucian rulers of China, the Manchus, were suspicious of all foreign merchants.
They feared that the merchants would meddle in local politics and disrupt their authority.
So the Manchus were unwilling to allow the entry of foreign goods.
In such a situation, how could Western merchants finance the tea trade?
How could they balance their trade?
They could buy tea only by paying in silver coins or bullion.
This meant an outflow of treasure from England, a prospect that created widespread anxiety.
It was believed that a loss of treasure would impoverish the nation and deplete its wealth.
Merchants therefore looked for ways to stop this loss of silver.
They searched for a commodity they could sell in China, something they could persuade the Chinese to buy.
Opium was such a commodity.
The Portuguese had introduced opium into China in the early sixteenth century.
Opium was however, known primarily for its medical properties and used in miniuscule quantities for certain types of medicines.
The Chinese were aware of the dangers of opium addiction, and the Emperor had forbidden its production and sale except for medicinal purposes.
But Western merchants in the mid-eighteenth century began an illegal trade in opium.
It was unloaded in a number of sea ports of south-eastern China and carried by local agents to the interiors.
By the early 1820s, about 10,000 crates were being annually smuggled into China.
Fifteen years later, over 35,000 crates were being unloaded every year.
While the English cultivated a taste for Chinese tea, the Chinese became addicted to opium.
People of all classes took to the drug – shopkeepers and peddlers, officials and army men, aristocrats and paupers.
Lin Ze-xu, Special Commissioner at Canton in 1839, estimated that there were over 4 million opium smokers in China.
A British doctor in Canton put the figure at 12 million.
As China became a country of opium addicts, British trade in tea flourished.
The returns from opium sale financed the tea purchases in China.
Where did Opium come from?
This is where the Indian peasants come into the story.
When the British conquered Bengal, they made a determined effort to produce opium in the lands under their control.
As the market for opium expanded in China, larger volumes of opium flowed out of Bengal ports.
Before 1767, no more than 500 chests (of two maunds each) were being exported from India.
Within four years, the quantity trebled.
A hundred years later, in 1870, the government was exporting about 50,000 chests annually.
Supplies had to be increased to feed this booming export trade.
But this was not easy.
How could the cultivators be persuaded to grow opium?
For a variety of reasons, they were unwilling to turn their fields over to poppy.
First, the crop had to be grown on the best land, on fields that lay near villages and were well manured.
On this land peasants usually produced pulses.
If they planted opium on this land, then pulses could not be grown there, or they would have to be grown on inferior land where harvests were poorer and uncertain.
Second, many cultivators owned no land.
To cultivate, they had to pay rent and lease land from landlords.
And the rent charged on good lands near villages was very high.
Third, the cultivation of opium was a difficult process.
The plant was delicate, and cultivators had to spend long hours nurturing it.
This meant that they did not have enough time to care for other crops.
Finally, the price the government paid to the cultivators for the opium they produced was very low.
It was unprofitable for cultivators to grow opium at that price.
How Were Unwilling Cultivators Made to Produce Opium?
Unwilling cultivators were made to produce opium through a system of advances.
In the rural areas of Bengal and Bihar, there were large numbers of poor peasants.
They never had enough to survive.
It was difficult for them to pay rent to the landlord or to buy food and clothing.
From the 1780s, such peasants found their village headmen (mahato) giving them money advances to produce opium.
When offered a loan, the cultivators were tempted to accept, hoping to meet their immediate needs and pay back the loan at a later stage.
But the loan tied the peasant to the headman and through him to the government.
It was the government opium agents who were advancing the money to the headmen, who in turn gave it to the cultivators.
By taking the loan, the cultivator was forced to grow opium on a specified area of land and hand over the produce to the agents once the crop had been harvested.
He had no option of planting the field with a crop of his choice or of selling his produce to anyone but the government agent.
And he had to accept the low price offered for the produce.
The problem could have been partly solved by increasing the price of opium.
But the government was reluctant to do so.
It wanted to produce opium at a cheap rate and sell it at a high price to opium agents in Calcutta, who then shipped it to China.
This difference between the buying and selling price was the government’s opium revenue.
The prices given to the peasants were so low that by the early eighteenth century angry peasants began agitating for higher prices and refused to take advances.
In regions around Benaras, cultivators began giving up opium cultivation.
They produced sugarcane and potatoes instead.
Many cultivators sold off their crop to travelling traders (pykars) who offered higher prices.
By 1773, the British government in Bengal had established a monopoly to trade in opium.
No one else was legally permitted to trade in the product.
By the 1820s, the British found to their horror that opium production in their territories was rapidly declining, but its production outside the British territories was increasing.
It was being produced in Central India and Rajasthan, within princely states that were not under British control.
In these regions, local traders were offering much higher prices to peasants and exporting opium to China.
In fact, armed bands of traders were found carrying on the trade in the 1820s.
To the British this trade was illegal: it was smuggling and it had to be stopped.
Government monopoly had to be retained.
It therefore instructed its agents posted in the princely states to confiscate all opium and destroy the crops.
This conflict between the British government, peasants and local traders continued as long as opium production lasted.
Conclusion
In this chapter you saw how rural areas in different parts of the world changed in the modern period.
While looking at these changes we must remember that their pattern was not the same everywhere.
All sections of rural people were not affected in the same way.
Some gained, others lost.
Nor was the history of modernisation simply a glorious story of growth and development.
It was also a story of displacements and impoverishment, ecological crises and social rebellion, colonisation and repression.
We need to look at these variations and strands to understand the diverse ways in which peasants and farmers confronted the modern world.
Vietnam gained formal independence in 1945, before India, but it took another three decades of fighting before the Republic of Vietnam was formed.
This chapter on Indo-China will introduce you to one of the important states of the peninsula, namely, Vietnam.
Nationalism in Indo-China developed in a colonial context.
The knitting together of a modern Vietnamese nation that brought the different communities together was in part the result of colonisation but, as importantly, it was shaped by the struggle against colonial domination.
If you see the historical experience of Indo-China in relation to that of India, you will discover important differences in the way colonial empires functioned and the anti-imperial movement developed.
By looking at such differences and similarities you can understand the variety of ways in which nationalism has developed and shaped the contemporary world.
Emerging from the Shadow of China
Indo-China comprises the modern countries of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia (see Fig.
1).
Its early history shows many different groups of people living in this area under the shadow of the powerful empire of China.
Even when an independent country was established in what is now northern and central Vietnam, its rulers continued to maintain the Chinese system of government as well as Chinese culture.
Vietnam was also linked to what has been called the maritime silk route that brought in goods, people and ideas.
Other networks of trade connected it to the hinterlands where non-Vietnamese people such as the Khmer Cambodians lived.
Colonial Domination and Resistance
The colonisation of Vietnam by the French brought the people of the country into conflict with the colonisers in all areas of life.
The most visible form of French control was military and economic domination but the French also built a system that tried to reshape the culture of the Vietnamese.
Nationalism in Vietnam emerged through the efforts of different sections of society to fight against the French and all they represented.
French troops landed in Vietnam in 1858 and by the mid-1880s they had established a firm grip over the northern region.
After the Franco-Chinese war the French assumed control of Tonkin and Anaam and, in 1887, French Indo-China was formed.
In the following decades the French sought to consolidate their position, and people in Vietnam began reflecting on the nature of the loss that Vietnam was suffering.
Nationalist resistance developed out of this reflection.
Why the French thought Colonies Necessary
Colonies were considered essential to supply natural resources and other essential goods.
Like other Western nations, France also thought it was the mission of the ‘advanced’ European countries to bring the benefits of civilisation to backward peoples.
The French began by building canals and draining lands in the Mekong delta to increase cultivation.
The vast system of irrigation works – canals and earthworks – built mainly with forced labour, increased rice production and allowed the export of rice to the international market.
The area under rice cultivation went up from 274,000 hectares in 1873 to 1.1 million hectares in 1900 and 2.2 million in 1930.
Vietnam exported two-thirds of its rice production and by 1931 had become the third largest exporter of rice in the world.
This was followed by infrastructure projects to help transport goods for trade, move military garrisons and control the entire region.
Construction of a trans-Indo-China rail network that would link the northern and southern parts of Vietnam and China was begun.
This final link with Yunan in China was completed by 1910.
The second line was also built, linking Vietnam to Siam (as Thailand was then called), via the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh.
By the 1920s, to ensure higher levels of profit for their businesses, French business interests were pressurising the government in Vietnam to develop the infrastructure further.
Should Colonies be Developed?
Everyone agreed that colonies had to serve the interests of the mother country.
But the question was – how?
Some like Paul Bernard, an influential writer and policy-maker, strongly believed that the economy of the colonies needed to be developed.
He argued that the purpose of acquiring colonies was to make profits.
If the economy was developed and the standard of living of the people improved, they would buy more goods.
The market would consequently expand, leading to better profits for French business.
Bernard suggested that there were several barriers to economic growth in Vietnam: high population levels, low agricultural productivity and extensive indebtedness amongst the peasants.
To reduce rural poverty and increase agricultural productivity it was necessary to carry out land reforms as the Japanese had done in the 1890s.
However, this could not ensure sufficient employment.
As the experience of Japan showed, industrialisation would be essential to create more jobs.
The colonial economy in Vietnam was, however, primarily based on rice cultivation and rubber plantations owned by the French and a small Vietnamese elite.
Rail and port facilities were set up to service this sector.
Indentured Vietnamese labour was widely used in the rubber plantations.
The French, contrary to what Bernard would have liked, did little to industrialise the economy.
In the rural areas landlordism spread and the standard of living declined.
The Dilemma of Colonial Education
French colonisation was not based only on economic exploitation.
It was also driven by the idea of a ‘civilising mission’.
Like the British in India, the French claimed that they were bringing modern civilisation to the Vietnamese.
They took for granted that Europe had developed the most advanced civilisation.
So it became the duty of the Europeans to introduce these modern ideas to the colony even if this meant destroying local cultures, religions and traditions, because these were seen as outdated and prevented modern development.
Education was seen as one way to civilise the ‘native’.
But in order to educate them, the French had to resolve a dilemma.
How far were the Vietnamese to be educated?
The French needed an educated local labour force but they feared that education might create problems.
Once educated, the Vietnamese may begin to question colonial domination.
Moreover, French citizens living in Vietnam (called colons) began fearing that they might lose their jobs – as teachers, shopkeepers, policemen – to the educated Vietnamese.
So they opposed policies that would give the Vietnamese full access to French education.
Talking Modern
The French were faced with yet another problem in the sphere of education: the elites in Vietnam were powerfully influenced by Chinese culture.
To consolidate their power, the French had to counter this Chinese influence.
So they systematically dismantled the traditional educational system and established French schools for the Vietnamese.
But this was not easy.
Chinese, the language used by the elites so far, had to be replaced.
But what was to take its place?
Was the language to be Vietnamese or French?
There were two broad opinions on this question.
Some policy- makers emphasised the need to use the French language as the medium of instruction.
By learning the language, they felt, the Vietnamese would be introduced to the culture and civilisation of France.
This would help create an ‘Asiatic France solidly tied to European France’.
The educated people in Vietnam would respect French sentiments and ideals, see the superiority of French culture, and work for the French.
Others were opposed to French being the only medium of instruction.
They suggested that Vietnamese be taught in lower classes and French in the higher classes.
The few who learnt French and acquired French culture were to be rewarded with French citizenship.
However, only the Vietnamese elite – comprising a small fraction of the population – could enroll in the schools, and only a few among those admitted ultimately passed the school-leaving examination.
This was largely because of a deliberate policy of failing students, particularly in the final year, so that they could not qualify for the better-paid jobs.
Usually, as many as two-thirds of the students failed.
In 1925, in a population of 17 million, there were less than 400 who passed the examination.
School textbooks glorified the French and justified colonial rule.
The Vietnamese were represented as primitive and backward, capable of manual labour but not of intellectual reflection; they could work in the fields but not rule themselves; they were ‘skilled copyists’ but not creative.
School children were told that only French rule could ensure peace in Vietnam: ‘Since the establishment of French rule the Vietnamese peasant no longer lives in constant terror of pirates ...
Calm is complete, and the peasant can work with a good heart.
Looking Modern
The Tonkin Free School was started in 1907 to provide a Western- style education.
This education included classes in science, hygiene and French (these classes were held in the evening and had to be paid for separately).
The school’s approach to what it means to be ‘modern’ is a good example of the thinking prevalent at that time.
It was not enough to learn science and Western ideas: to be modern the Vietnamese had to also look modern.
The school encouraged the adoption of Western styles such as having a short haircut.
For the Vietnamese this meant a major break with their own identity since they traditionally kept long hair.
Resistance in Schools
Teachers and students did not blindly follow the curriculum.
Sometimes there was open opposition, at other times there was silent resistance.
As the numbers of Vietnamese teachers increased in the lower classes, it became difficult to control what was actually taught.
While teaching, Vietnamese teachers quietly modified the text and criticised what was stated.
In 1926 a major protest erupted in the Saigon Native Girls School.
A Vietnamese girl sitting in one of the front seats was asked to move to the back of the class and allow a local French student to occupy the front bench.
She refused.
The principal, also a colon (French people in the colonies), expelled her.
When angry students protested, they too were expelled, leading to a further spread of open protests.
Seeing the situation getting out of control, the government forced the school to take the students back.
The principal reluctantly agreed but warned the students, ‘I will crush all Vietnamese under my feet.
Ah!
You wish my deportation.
Know well that I will leave only after I am assured Vietnamese no longer inhabit Cochinchina.’
Elsewhere, students fought against the colonial government’s efforts to prevent the Vietnamese from qualifying for white-collar jobs.
They were inspired by patriotic feelings and the conviction that it was the duty of the educated to fight for the benefit of society.
This brought them into conflict with the French as well as the traditional elite, since both saw their positions threatened.
By the 1920s, students were forming various political parties, such as the Party of Young Annan, and publishing nationalist journals such as the Annanese Student.
Schools thus became an important place for political and cultural battles.
The French sought to strengthen their rule in Vietnam through the control of education.
They tried to change the values, norms and perceptions of the people, to make them believe in the superiority of French civilisation and the inferiority of the Vietnamese.
Vietnamese intellectuals, on the other hand, feared that Vietnam was losing not just control over its territory but its very identity: its own culture and customs were being devalued and the people were developing a master-slave mentality.
The battle against French colonial education became part of the larger battle against colonialism and for independence.
Hygiene, Disease and Everyday Resistance
Education was not the only sphere of everyday life in which such political battles against colonialism were fought.
In many other institutions we can see the variety of small ways in which the colonised expressed their anger against the colonisers.
Plague Strikes Hanoi
Take the case of health and hygiene.
When the French set about creating a modern Vietnam, they decided to rebuild Hanoi.
The latest ideas about architecture and modern engineering skills were employed to build a new and ‘modern’ city.
In 1903, the modern part of Hanoi was struck by bubonic plague.
In many colonial countries, measures to control the spread of disease created serious social conflicts.
But in Hanoi events took a peculiarly interesting turn.
The French part of Hanoi was built as a beautiful and clean city with wide avenues and a well-laid-out sewer system, while the ‘native quarter’ was not provided with any modern facilities.
The refuse from the old city drained straight out into the river or, during heavy rains or floods, overflowed into the streets.
Thus what was installed to create a hygienic environment in the French city became the cause of the plague.
The large sewers in the modern part of the city, a symbol of modernity, were an ideal and protected breeding ground for rats.
The sewers also served as a great transport system, allowing the rats to move around the city without any problem.
And rats began to enter the well-cared-for homes of the French through the sewage pipes.
What was to be done?
The Rat Hunt
To stem this invasion, a rat hunt was started in 1902.
The French hired Vietnamese workers and paid them for each rat they caught.
Rats began to be caught in thousands: on 30 May, for instance, 20,000 were caught but still there seemed to be no end.
For the Vietnamese the rat hunt seemed to provide an early lesson in the success of collective bargaining.
Those who did the dirty work of entering sewers found that if they came together they could negotiate a higher bounty.
They also discovered innovative ways to profit from this situation.
The bounty was paid when a tail was given as proof that a rat had been killed.
So the rat-catchers took to just clipping the tails and releasing the rats, so that the process could be repeated, over and over again.
Some people, in fact, began raising rats to earn a bounty.
Defeated by the resistance of the weak, the French were forced to scrap the bounty programme.
None of this prevented the bubonic plague, which swept through the area in 1903 and in subsequent years.
In a way, the rat menace marks the limits of French power and the contradictions in their ‘civilising mission’.
And the actions of the rat-catchers tell us of the numerous small ways in which colonialism was fought in everyday life.
Religion and Anti-colonialism
Colonial domination was exercised by control over all areas of private and public life.
The French occupied Vietnam militarily but they also sought to reshape social and cultural life.
While religion played an important role in strengthening colonial control, it also provided ways of resistance.
Let us consider how this happened.
Vietnam’s religious beliefs were a mixture of Buddhism, Confucianism and local practices.
Christianity, introduced by French missionaries, was intolerant of this easygoing attitude and viewed the Vietnamese tendency to revere the supernatural as something to be corrected.
From the eighteenth century, many religious movements were hostile to the Western presence.
An early movement against French control and the spread of Christianity was the Scholars Revolt in 1868.
This revolt was led by officials at the imperial court angered by the spread of Catholicism and French power.
They led a general uprising in Ngu An and Ha Tien provinces where over a thousand Catholics were killed.
Catholic missionaries had been active in winning converts since the early seventeenth century, and by the middle of the eighteenth century had converted some 300,000.
The French crushed the movement but this uprising served to inspire other patriots to rise up against them.
The elites in Vietnam were educated in Chinese and Confucianism.
But religious beliefs among the peasantry were shaped by a variety of syncretic traditions that combined Buddhism and local beliefs.
There were many popular religions in Vietnam that were spread by people who claimed to have seen a vision of God.
Some of these religious movements supported the French, but others inspired movements against colonial rule.
One such movement was the Hoa Hao.
It began in 1939 and gained great popularity in the fertile Mekong delta area.
It drew on religious ideas popular in anti-French uprisings of the nineteenth century.
The founder of Hoa Hao was a man called Huynh Phu So.
He performed miracles and helped the poor.
His criticism against useless expenditure had a wide appeal.
He also opposed the sale of child brides, gambling and the use of alcohol and opium.
The French tried to suppress the movement inspired by Huynh Phu So.
They declared him mad, called him the Mad Bonze, and put him in a mental asylum.
Interestingly, the doctor who had to prove him insane became his follower, and finally in 1941, even the French doctors declared that he was sane.
The French authorities exiled him to Laos and sent many of his followers to concentration camps.
Movements like this always had a contradictory relationship with mainstream nationalism.
Political parties often drew upon their support, but were uneasy about their activities.
They could neither control or discipline these groups, nor support their rituals and practices.
Yet the significance of these movements in arousing anti-imperialist sentiments should not be underestimated.
The Vision of Modernisation
French colonialism was resisted at many levels and in various forms.
But all nationalists had to grapple with one set of questions: What was it to be Modern?
What was it to be Nationalist?
In order to be modern, was it necessary to regard tradition as backward and reject all earlier ideas and social practices?
Was it necessary to consider the ‘West’ as the symbol of development and civilisation, and try and copy the West?
Different answers were offered to such questions.
Some intellectuals felt that Vietnamese traditions had to be strengthened to resist the domination of the West, while others felt that Vietnam had to learn from the West even while opposing foreign domination.
These differing visions led to complex debates, which could not be easily resolved.
In the late nineteenth century, resistance to French domination was very often led by Confucian scholar-activists, who saw their world crumbling.
Educated in the Confucian tradition, Phan Boi Chau (1867-1940) was one such nationalist.
He became a major figure in the anti-colonial resistance from the time he formed the Revolutionary Society (Duy Tan Hoi) in 1903, with Prince Cuong De as the head.
Phan Boi Chau met the Chinese reformer Liang Qichao (1873-1929) in Yokohama in 1905.
Phan’s most influential book, The History of the Loss of Vietnam was written under the strong influence and advice of Qichao.
It became a widely read bestseller in Vietnam and China and was even made into a play.
The book focuses on two connected themes: the loss of sovereignty and the severing of ties with China – ties that bound the elites of the two countries within a shared culture.
It is this double loss that Phan laments, a lament that was typical of reformers from within the traditional elite.
Other nationalists strongly differed with Phan Boi Chau.
One such was Phan Chu Trinh (1871-1926).
He was intensely hostile to the monarchy and opposed to the idea of resisting the French with the help of the court.
His desire was to establish a democratic republic.
Profoundly influenced by the democratic ideals of the West, he did not want a wholesale rejection of Western civilisation.
He accepted the French revolutionary ideal of liberty but charged the French for not abiding by the ideal.
He demanded that the French set up legal and educational institutions, and develop agriculture and industries.
Other Ways of Becoming Modern: Japan and China
Early Vietnamese nationalists had a close relationship with Japan and China.
They provided models for those looking to change, a refuge for those who were escaping French police, and a location where a wider Asian network of revolutionaries could be established.
In the first decade of the twentieth century a ‘go east movement’ became popular.
In 1907-08 some 300 Vietnamese students went to Japan to acquire modern education.
For many of them the primary objective was to drive out the French from Vietnam, overthrow the puppet emperor and re-establish the Nguyen dynasty that had been deposed by the French.
These nationalists looked for foreign arms and help.
They appealed to the Japanese as fellow Asians.
Japan had modernised itself and had resisted colonisation by the West.
Besides, its victory over Russia in 1907 proved its military capabilities.
Vietnamese students established a branch of the Restoration Society in Tokyo but after 1908, the Japanese Ministry of Interior clamped down on them.
Many, including Phan Boi Chau, were deported and forced to seek exile in China and Thailand.
Developments in China also inspired Vietnamese nationalists.
In 1911, the long established monarchy in China was overthrown by a popular movement under Sun Yat-sen, and a Republic was set up.
Inspired by these developments, Vietnamese students organised the Association for the Restoration of Vietnam (Viet-Nam Quan Phuc Hoi).
Now the nature of the anti-French independence movement changed.
The objective was no longer to set up a constitutional monarchy but a democratic republic.
Soon, however, the anti-imperialist movement in Vietnam came under a new type of leadership.
The Communist Movement and Vietnamese Nationalism
The Great Depression of the 1930s had a profound impact on Vietnam.
The prices of rubber and rice fell, leading to rising rural debts, unemployment and rural uprisings, such as in the provinces of Nghe An and Ha Tinh.
These provinces were among the poorest, had an old radical tradition, and have been called the ‘electrical fuses’ of Vietnam – when the system was under pressure they were the first to blow.
The French put these uprisings down with great severity, even using planes to bomb demonstrators.
In February 1930, Ho Chi Minh brought together competing nationalist groups to establish the Vietnamese Communist (Vietnam Cong San Dang) Party, later renamed the Indo-Chinese Communist Party.
He was inspired by the militant demonstrations of the European communist parties.
In 1940 Japan occupied Vietnam, as part of its imperial drive to control Southeast Asia.
So nationalists now had to fight against the Japanese as well as the French.
The League for the Independence of Vietnam (Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh), which came to be known as the Vietminh, fought the Japanese occupation and recaptured Hanoi in September 1945.
The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was formed and Ho Chi Minh became Chairman.
The New Republic of Vietnam
The new republic faced a number of challenges.
The French tried to regain control by using the emperor, Bao Dai, as their puppet.
Faced with the French offensive, the Vietminh were forced to retreat to the hills.
After eight years of fighting, the French were defeated in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu.
The Supreme French Commander of the French armies, General Henry Navarre had declared confidently in 1953 that they would soon be victorious.
But on 7 May 1954, the Vietminh annihilated and captured more than 16,000 soldiers of the French Expeditionary Corps.
The entire commanding staff, including a general, 16 colonels and 1,749 officers, were taken prisoner.
In the peace negotiations in Geneva that followed the French defeat, the Vietnamese were persuaded to accept the division of the country.
North and south were split: Ho Chi Minh and the communists took power in the north while Bao Dai’s regime was put in power in the south.
This division set in motion a series of events that turned Vietnam into a battlefield bringing death and destruction to its people as well as the environment.
The Bao Dai regime was soon overthrown by a coup led by Ngo Dinh Diem.
Diem built a repressive and authoritarian government.
Anyone who opposed him was called a communist and was jailed and killed.
Diem retained Ordinance 10, a French law that permitted Christianity but outlawed Buddhism.
His dictatorial rule came to be opposed by a broad opposition united under the banner of the National Liberation Front (NLF).
With the help of the Ho Chi Minh government in the north, the NLF fought for the unification of the country.
The US watched this alliance with fear.
Worried about communists gaining power, it decided to intervene decisively, sending in troops and arms.
The Entry of the US into the War Indo-China
US entry into the war marked a new phase that proved costly to the Vietnamese as well as to the Americans.
From 1965 to 1972, over 3,403,100 US services personnel served in Vietnam (7,484 were women).
Even though the US had advanced technology and good medical supplies, casualties were high.
About 47,244 died in battle and 303,704 were wounded.
(Of those wounded, 23,014 were listed by the Veterans Administration to be 100 per cent disabled.)
This phase of struggle with the US was brutal.
Thousands of US troops arrived equipped with heavy weapons and tanks and backed by the most powerful bombers of the time – B52s.
The wide spread attacks and use of chemical weapons – Napalm, Agent Orange, and phosphorous bombs – destroyed many villages and decimated jungles.
Civilians died in large numbers.
The effect of the war was felt within the US as well.
Many were critical of the government for getting involved in a war that they saw as indefensible.
When the youth were drafted for the war, the anger spread.
Compulsory service in the armed forces, however, could be waived for university graduates.
This meant that many of those sent to fight did not belong to the privileged elite but were minorities and children of working-class families.
The US media and films played a major role in both supporting as well as criticising the war.
Hollywood made films in support of the war, such as John Wayne’s Green Berets (1968).
This has been cited by many as an example of an unthinking propaganda film that was responsible for motivating many young men to die in the war.
Other films were more critical as they tried to understand the reasons for this war.
Francis Ford Coppola’s Apocalypse Now (1979) reflected the moral confusion that the war had caused in the US.
The war grew out of a fear among US policy-planners that the victory of the Ho Chi Minh government would start a domino effect – communist governments would be established in other countries in the area.
They Fig.
13 – In December 1972 Hanoi was bombed.
underestimated the power of nationalism to move people to action, inspire them to sacrifice their home and family, live under horrific conditions, and fight for independence.
They underestimated the power of a small country to fight the most technologically advanced country in the world.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail
The story of the Ho Chi Minh trail is one way of understanding the nature of the war that the Vietnamese fought against the US.
It symbolises how the Vietnamese used their limited resources to great advantage.
The trail, an immense network of footpaths and roads, was used to transport men and materials from the north to the south.
The trail was improved from the late 1950s, and from 1967 about 20,000 North Vietnamese troops came south each month on this trail.
The trail had support bases and hospitals along the way.
In some parts supplies were transported in trucks, but mostly they were carried by porters, who were mainly women.
These porters carried about 25 kilos on their backs, or about 70 kilos on their bicycles.
Most of the trail was outside Vietnam in neighbouring Laos and Cambodia with branch lines extending into South Vietnam.
The US regularly bombed this trail trying to disrupt supplies, but efforts to destroy this important supply line by intensive bombing failed because they were rebuilt very quickly.
The Nation and Its Heroes
Another way of looking at social movements is to see how they affect different groups in society.
Let us see how the roles of women were specified in the anti-imperialist movement in Vietnam, and what that tells us about nationalist ideology.
Women as Rebels
Women in Vietnam traditionally enjoyed greater equality than in China, particularly among the lower classes, but they had only limited freedom to determine their future and played no role in public life.
As the nationalist movement grew, the status of women came to be questioned and a new image of womanhood emerged.
Writers and political thinkers began idealising women who rebelled against social norms.
In the 1930s, a famous novel by Nhat Linh caused a scandal because it showed a woman leaving a forced marriage and marrying someone of her choice, someone who was involved in nationalist politics.
This rebellion against social conventions marked the arrival of the new woman in Vietnamese society.
Heroes of Past Times
Rebel women of the past were similarly celebrated.
In 1913, the nationalist Phan Boi Chau wrote a play based on the lives of the Trung sisters who had fought against Chinese domination in 39-43 CE .
In this play he depicted these sisters as patriots fighting to save the Vietnamese nation from the Chinese.
The actual reasons for the revolt are a matter of debate among scholars, but after Phan’s play the Trung sisters came to be idealised and glorified.
They were depicted in paintings, plays and novels as representing the indomitable will and the intense patriotism of the Vietnamese.
We are told that they gathered a force of over 30,000, resisted the Chinese for two years, and when ultimately defeated, they committed suicide, instead of surrendering to the enemy.
Other women rebels of the past were part of the popular nationalist lore.
One of the most venerated was Trieu Au who lived in the third century CE .
Orphaned in childhood, she lived with her brother.
On growing up she left home, went into the jungles, organised a large army and resisted Chinese rule.
Finally, when her army was crushed, she drowned herself.
She became a sacred figure, not just a martyr who fought for the honour of the country.
Nationalists popularised her image to inspire people to action.
Women as Warriors
In the 1960s, photographs in magazines and journals showed women as brave fighters.
There were pictures of women militia shooting down planes.
They were portrayed as young, brave and dedicated.
Stories were written to show how happy they felt when they joined the army and could carry a rifle.
Some stories spoke of their incredible bravery in single-handedly killing the enemy – Nguyen Thi Xuan, for instance, was reputed to have shot down a jet with just twenty bullets.
Women were represented not only as warriors but also as workers: they were shown with a rifle in one hand and a hammer in the other.
Whether young or old, women began to be depicted as selflessly working and fighting to save the country.
As casualties in the war increased in the 1960s, women were urged to join the struggle in larger numbers.
Many women responded and joined the resistance movement.
They helped in nursing the wounded, constructing underground rooms and tunnels and fighting the enemy.
Along the Ho Chi Minh trail young volunteers kept open 2,195 km of strategic roads and guarded 2,500 key points.
They built six airstrips, neutralised tens of thousands of bombs, transported tens of thousands of kilograms of cargo, weapons and food and shot down fifteen planes.
Between 1965 and 1975, of the 17,000 youth who worked on the trail, 70 to 80 per cent were women.
One military historian argues that there were 1.5 million women in the regular army, the militia, the local forces and professional teams.
Women in Times of Peace
By the 1970s, as peace talks began to get under way and the end of the war seemed near, women were no longer represented as warriors.
Now the image of women as workers begins to predominate.
They are shown working in agricultural cooperatives, factories and production units, rather than as fighters.
The End of the War
The prolongation of the war created strong reactions even within the US.
It was clear that the US had failed to achieve its objectives: the Vietnamese resistance had not been crushed; the support of the Vietnamese people for US action had not been won.
In the meantime, thousands of young US soldiers had lost their lives, and countless Vietnamese civilians had been killed.
This was a war that has been called the first television war.
Battle scenes were shown on the daily news programmes.
Many became disillusioned with what the US was doing and writers such as Mary McCarthy, and actors like Jane Fonda even visited North Vietnam and praised their heroic defence of the country.
The scholar Noam Chomsky called the war ‘the greatest threat to peace, to national self-determination, and to international cooperation’.
The widespread questioning of government policy strengthened moves to negotiate an end to the war.
A peace settlement was signed in Paris in January 1974.
This ended conflict with the US but fighting between the Saigon regime and the NLF continued.
The NLF occupied the presidential palace in Saigon on 30 April 1975 and unified Vietnam.
It is difficult for us to imagine a world without printed matter.
We find evidence of print everywhere around us – in books, journals, newspapers, prints of famous paintings, and also in everyday things like theatre programmes, official circulars, calendars, diaries, advertisements, cinema posters at street corners.
We read printed literature, see printed images, follow the news through newspapers, and track public debates that appear in print.
We take for granted this world of print and often forget that there was a time before print.
We may not realise that print itself has a history which has, in fact, shaped our contemporary world.
What is this history?
When did printed literature begin to circulate?
How has it helped create the modern world?
In this chapter we will look at the development of print, from its beginnings in East Asia to its expansion in Europe and in India.
We will understand the impact of the spread of technology and consider how social lives and cultures changed with the coming of print.
The First Printed Books
The earliest kind of print technology was developed in China, Japan and Korea.
This was a system of hand printing.
From AD 594 onwards, books in China were printed by rubbing paper – also invented there – against the inked surface of woodblocks.
As both sides of the thin, porous sheet could not be printed, the traditional Chinese ‘accordion book’ was folded and stitched at the side.
Superbly skilled craftsmen could duplicate, with remarkable accuracy, the beauty of calligraphy.
The imperial state in China was, for a very long time, the major producer of printed material.
China possessed a huge bureaucratic system which recruited its personnel through civil service examinations.
Textbooks for this examination were printed in vast numbers under the sponsorship of the imperial state.
From the sixteenth century, the number of examination candidates went up and that increased the volume of print.
By the seventeenth century, as urban culture bloomed in China, the uses of print diversified.
Print was no longer used just by scholar- officials.
Merchants used print in their everyday life, as they collected trade information.
Reading increasingly became a leisure activity.
The new readership preferred fictional narratives, poetry, autobiographies, anthologies of literary masterpieces, and romantic plays.
Rich women began to read, and many women began publishing their poetry and plays.
Wives of scholar-officials published their works and courtesans wrote about their lives.
This new reading culture was accompanied by a new technology.
Western printing techniques and mechanical presses were imported in the late nineteenth century as Western powers established their outposts in China.
Shanghai became the hub of the new print culture, catering to the Western-style schools.
From hand printing there was now a gradual shift to mechanical printing.
Print in Japan
Buddhist missionaries from China introduced hand-printing technology into Japan around AD 768-770.
The oldest Japanese book, printed in AD 868, is the Buddhist Diamond Sutra, containing six sheets of text and woodcut illustrations.
Pictures were printed on textiles, playing cards and paper money.
In medieval Japan, poets and prose writers were regularly published, and books were cheap and abundant.
Printing of visual material led to interesting publishing practices.
In the late eighteenth century, in the flourishing urban circles at Edo (later to be known as Tokyo), illustrated collections of paintings depicted an elegant urban culture, involving artists, courtesans, and teahouse gatherings.
Libraries and bookstores were packed with hand-printed material of various types – books on women, musical instruments, calculations, tea ceremony, flower arrangements, proper etiquette, cooking and famous places.
Print Comes to Europe
For centuries, silk and spices from China flowed into Europe through the silk route.
In the eleventh century, Chinese paper reached Europe via the same route.
Paper made possible the production of manuscripts, carefully written by scribes.
Then, in 1295, Marco Polo, a great explorer, returned to Italy after many years of exploration in China.
As you read above, China already had the technology of woodblock printing.
Marco Polo brought this knowledge back with him.
Now Italians began producing books with woodblocks, and soon the technology spread to other parts of Europe.
Luxury editions were still handwritten on very expensive vellum, meant for aristocratic circles and rich monastic libraries which scoffed at printed books as cheap vulgarities.
Merchants and students in the university towns bought the cheaper printed copies.
As the demand for books increased, booksellers all over Europe began exporting books to many different countries.
Book fairs were held at different places.
Production of handwritten manuscripts was also organised in new ways to meet the expanded demand.
Scribes or skilled handwriters were no longer solely employed by wealthy or influential patrons but increasingly by booksellers as well.
More than 50 scribes often worked for one bookseller.
But the production of handwritten manuscripts could not satisfy the ever-increasing demand for books.
Copying was an expensive, laborious and time-consuming business.
Manuscripts were fragile, awkward to handle, and could not be carried around or read easily.
Their circulation therefore remained limited.
With the growing demand for books, woodblock printing gradually became more and more popular.
By the early fifteenth century, woodblocks were being widely used in Europe to print textiles, playing cards, and religious pictures with simple, brief texts.
There was clearly a great need for even quicker and cheaper reproduction of texts.
This could only be with the invention of a new print technology.
The breakthrough occurred at Strasbourg, Germany, where Johann Gutenberg developed the first-known printing press in the 1430s.
Gutenberg and the Printing Press
Gutenberg was the son of a merchant and grew up on a large agricultural estate.
From his childhood he had seen wine and olive presses.
Subsequently, he learnt the art of polishing stones, became a master goldsmith, and also acquired the expertise to create lead moulds used for making trinkets.
Drawing on this knowledge, Gutenberg adapted existing technology to design his innovation.
The olive press provided the model for the printing press, and moulds were used for casting the metal types for the letters of the alphabet.
By 1448, Gutenberg perfected the system.
The first book he printed was the Bible.
About 180 copies were printed and it took three years to produce them.
By the standards of the time this was fast production.
The new technology did not entirely displace the existing art of producing books by hand.
In fact, printed books at first closely resembled the written manuscripts in appearance and layout.
The metal letters imitated the ornamental handwritten styles.
Borders were illuminated by hand with foliage and other patterns, and illustrations were painted.
In the books printed for the rich, space for decoration was kept blank on the printed page.
Each purchaser could choose the design and decide on the painting school that would do the illustrations.
In the hundred years between 1450 and 1550, printing presses were set up in most countries of Europe.
Printers from Germany travelled to other countries, seeking work and helping start new presses.
As the number of printing presses grew, book production boomed.
The second half of the fifteenth century saw 20 million copies of printed books flooding the markets in Europe.
The number went up in the sixteenth century to about 200 million copies.
This shift from hand printing to mechanical printing led to the print revolution.
The Print Revolution and Its Impact
What was the print revolution?
It was not just a development, a new way of producing books; it transformed the lives of people, changing their relationship to information and knowledge, and with institutions and authorities.
It influenced popular perceptions and opened up new ways of looking at things.
Let us explore some of these changes.
A New Reading Public
With the printing press, a new reading public emerged.
Printing reduced the cost of books.
The time and labour required to produce each book came down, and multiple copies could be produced with greater ease.
Books flooded the market, reaching out to an ever-growing readership.
Access to books created a new culture of reading.
Earlier, reading was restricted to the elites.
Common people lived in a world of oral culture.
They heard sacred texts read out, ballads recited, and folk tales narrated.
Knowledge was transferred orally.
People collectively heard a story, or saw a performance.
As you will see in Chapter 8, they did not read a book individually and silently.
Before the age of print, books were not only expensive but they could not be produced in sufficient numbers.
Now books could reach out to wider sections of people.
If earlier there was a hearing public, now a reading public came into being.
But the transition was not so simple.
Books could be read only by the literate, and the rates of literacy in most European countries were very low till the twentieth century.
How, then, could publishers persuade the common people to welcome the printed book?
To do this, they had to keep in mind the wider reach of the printed work: even those who did not read could certainly enjoy listening to books being read out.
So printers began publishing popular ballads and folk tales, and such books would be profusely illustrated with pictures.
These were then sung and recited at gatherings in villages and in taverns in towns.
Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally transmitted.
The line that separated the oral and reading cultures became blurred.
And the hearing public and reading public became intermingled.
Religious Debates and the Fear of Print Print created the possibility of wide circulation of ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and discussion.
Even those who disagreed with established authorities could now print and circulate their ideas.
Through the printed message, they could persuade people to think differently, and move them to action.
This had significance in different spheres of life.
Not everyone welcomed the printed book, and those who did also had fears about it.
Many were apprehensive of the effects that the easier access to the printed word and the wider circulation of books, could have on people’s minds.
It was feared that if there was no control over what was printed and read then rebellious and irreligious thoughts might spread.
If that happened the authority of ‘valuable’ literature would be destroyed.
Expressed by religious authorities and monarchs, as well as many writers and artists, this anxiety was the basis of widespread criticism of the new printed literature that had began to circulate.
Let us consider the implication of this in one sphere of life in early modern Europe – namely, religion.
In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote Ninety Five Theses criticising many of the practices and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church.
A printed copy of this was posted on a church door in Wittenberg.
It challenged the Church to debate his ideas.
Luther’s writings were immediately reproduced in vast numbers and read widely.
This lead to a division within the Church and to the beginning of the Protestant Reformation.
Luther’s translation of the New Testament sold 5,000 copies within a few weeks and a second edition appeared within three months.
Deeply grateful to print, Luther said, ‘Printing is the ultimate gift of God and the greatest one.’ Several scholars, in fact, think that print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and helped spread the new ideas that led to the Reformation.
Print and Dissent
The Reading Mania
Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries literacy rates went up in most parts of Europe.
Churches of different denominations set up schools in villages, carrying literacy to peasants and artisans.
By the end of the eighteenth century, in some parts of Europe literacy rates were as high as 60 to 80 per cent.
As literacy and schools spread in European countries, there was a virtual reading mania.
People wanted books to read and printers produced books in ever- increasing numbers.
New forms of popular literature appeared in print, targeting new audiences.
Booksellers employed pedlars who roamed around villages, carrying little books for sale.
There were almanacs or ritual calendars, along with ballads and folktales.
But other forms of reading matter, largely for entertainment, began to reach ordinary readers as well.
In England, penny chapbooks were carried by petty pedlars known as chapmen, and sold for a penny, so that even the poor could buy them.
In France, were the ‘Biliotheque Bleue’, which were low-priced small books printed on poor quality paper, and bound in cheap blue covers.
Then there were the romances, printed on four to six pages, and the more substantial ‘histories’ which were stories about the past.
Books were of various sizes, serving many different purposes and interests.
The periodical press developed from the early eighteenth century, combining information about current affairs with entertainment.
Newspapers and journals carried information about wars and trade, as well as news of developments in other places.
Similarly, the ideas of scientists and philosophers now became more accessible to the common people.
Ancient and medieval scientific texts were compiled and published, and maps and scientific diagrams were widely printed.
When scientists like Isaac Newton began to publish their discoveries, they could influence a much wider circle of scientifically minded readers.
The writings of thinkers such as Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean Jacques Rousseau were also widely printed and read.
Thus their ideas about science, reason and rationality found their way into popular literature.
‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world!’
By the mid-eighteenth century, there was a common conviction that books were a means of spreading progress and enlightenment.
Many believed that books could change the world, liberate society from despotism and tyranny, and herald a time when reason and intellect would rule.
Louise-Sebastien Mercier, a novelist in eighteenth-century France, declared: ‘The printing press is the most powerful engine of progress and public opinion is the force that will sweep despotism away.’ In many of Mercier’s novels, the heroes are transformed by acts of reading.
They devour books, are lost in the world books create, and become enlightened in the process.
Convinced of the power of print in bringing enlightenment and destroying the basis of despotism, Mercier proclaimed: ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world!
Tremble before the virtual writer!’
Print Culture and the French Revolution
Many historians have argued that print culture created the conditions within which French Revolution occurred.
Can we make such a connection?
Three types of arguments have been usually put forward.
First: print popularised the ideas of the Enlightenment thinkers.
Collectively, their writings provided a critical commentary on tradition, superstition and despotism.
They argued for the rule of reason rather than custom, and demanded that everything be judged through the application of reason and rationality.
They attacked the sacred authority of the Church and the despotic power of the state, thus eroding the legitimacy of a social order based on tradition.
The writings of Voltaire and Rousseau were read widely; and those who read these books saw the world through new eyes, eyes that were questioning, critical and rational.
Second: print created a new culture of dialogue and debate.
All values, norms and institutions were re-evaluated and discussed by a public that had become aware of the power of reason, and recognised the need to question existing ideas and beliefs.
Within this public culture, new ideas of social revolution came into being.
Third: by the 1780s there was an outpouring of literature that mocked the royalty and criticised their morality.
In the process, it raised questions about the existing social order.
Cartoons and caricatures typically suggested that the monarchy remained absorbed only in sensual pleasures while the common people suffered immense hardships.
This literature circulated underground and led to the growth of hostile sentiments against the monarchy.
How do we look at these arguments?
There can be no doubt that print helps the spread of ideas.
But we must remember that people did not read just one kind of literature.
If they read the ideas of Voltaire and Rousseau, they were also exposed to monarchical and Church propaganda.
They were not influenced directly by everything they read or saw.
They accepted some ideas and rejected others.
They interpreted things their own way.
Print did not directly shape their minds, but it did open up the possibility of thinking differently.
The Nineteenth Century
The nineteenth century saw vast leaps in mass literacy in Europe, bringing in large numbers of new readers among children, women and workers.
Children, Women and Workers
As primary education became compulsory from the late nineteenth century, children became an important category of readers.
Production of school textbooks became critical for the publishing industry.
A children’s press, devoted to literature for children alone, was set up in France in 1857.
This press published new works as well as old fairy tales and folk tales.
The Grimm Brothers in Germany spent years compiling traditional folk tales gathered from peasants.
What they collected was edited before the stories were published in a collection in 1812.
Anything that was considered unsuitable for children or would appear vulgar to the elites, was not included in the published version.
Rural folk tales thus acquired a new form.
In this way, print recorded old tales but also changed them.
Women became important as readers as well as writers.
Penny magazines (see Fig.
12) were especially meant for women, as were manuals teaching proper behaviour and housekeeping.
When novels began to be written in the nineteenth century, women were seen as important readers.
Some of the best- known novelists were women: Jane Austen, the Bronte sisters, George Eliot.
Their writings became important in defining a new type of woman: a person with will, strength of personality, determination and the power to think.
Lending libraries had been in existence from the seventeenth century onwards.
In the nineteenth century, lending libraries in England became instruments for educating white-collar workers, artisans and lower-middle-class people.
Sometimes, self-educated working class people wrote for themselves.
After the working day was gradually shortened from the mid-nineteenth century, workers had some time for self-improvement and self-expression.
They wrote political tracts and autobiographies in large numbers.
Further Innovations
By the late eighteenth century, the press came to be made out of metal.
Through the nineteenth century, there were a series of further innovations in printing technology.
By the mid-nineteenth century, Richard M. Hoe of New York had perfected the power-driven cylindrical press.
This was capable of printing 8,000 sheets per hour.
This press was particularly useful for printing newspapers.
In the late nineteenth century, the offset press was developed which could print up to six colours at a time.
From the turn of the twentieth century, electrically operated presses accelerated printing operations.
A series of other developments followed.
Methods of feeding paper improved, the quality of plates became better, automatic paper reels and photoelectric controls of the colour register were introduced.
The accumulation of several individual mechanical improvements transformed the appearance of printed texts.
Printers and publishers continuously developed new strategies to sell their product.
Nineteenth-century periodicals serialised important novels, which gave birth to a particular way of writing novels.
In the 1920s in England, popular works were sold in cheap series, called the Shilling Series.
The dust cover or the book jacket is also a twentieth-century innovation.
With the onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s, publishers feared a decline in book purchases.
To sustain buying, they brought out cheap paperback editions.
India and the World of Print
Let us see when printing began in India and how ideas and information were written before the age of print.
6.1 Manuscripts Before the Age of Print
India had a very rich and old tradition of handwritten manuscripts – in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, as well as in various vernacular languages.
Manuscripts were copied on palm leaves or on handmade paper.
Pages were sometimes beautifully illustrated.
They would be either pressed between wooden covers or sewn together to ensure preservation.
Manuscripts continued to be produced till well after the introduction of print, down to the late nineteenth century.
Manuscripts, however, were highly expensive and fragile.
They had to be handled carefully, and they could not be read easily as the script was written in different styles.
So manuscripts were not widely used in everyday life.
Even though pre-colonial Bengal had developed an extensive network of village primary schools, students very often did not read texts.
They only learnt to write.
Teachers dictated portions of texts from memory and students wrote them down.
Many thus became literate without ever actually reading any kinds of texts.
Print Comes to India
The printing press first came to Goa with Portuguese missionaries in the mid-sixteenth century.
Jesuit priests learnt Konkani and printed several tracts.
By 1674, about 50 books had been printed in the Konkani and in Kanara languages.
Catholic priests printed the first Tamil book in 1579 at Cochin, and in 1713 the first Malayalam book was printed by them.
By 1710, Dutch Protestant missionaries had printed 32 Tamil texts, many of them translations of older works.
The English language press did not grow in India till quite late even though the English East India Company began to import presses from the late seventeenth century.
From 1780, James Augustus Hickey began to edit the Bengal Gazette, a weekly magazine that described itself as ‘a commercial paper open to all, but influenced by none’.
So it was private English enterprise, proud of its independence from colonial influence, that began English printing in India.
Hickey published a lot of advertisements, including those that related to the import and sale of slaves.
But he also published a lot of gossip about the Company’s senior officials in India.
Enraged by this, Governor-General Warren Hastings persecuted Hickey, and encouraged the publication of officially sanctioned newspapers that could counter the flow of information that damaged the image of the colonial government.
By the close of the eighteenth century, a number of newspapers and journals appeared in print.
There were Indians, too, who began to publish Indian newspapers.
The first to appear was the weekly Bengal Gazette, brought out by Gangadhar Bhattacharya, who was close to Rammohun Roy.
Religious Reform and Public Debates
From the early nineteenth century, as you know, there were intense debates around religious issues.
Different groups confronted the changes happening within colonial society in different ways, and offered a variety of new interpretations of the beliefs of different religions.
Some criticised existing practices and campaigned for reform, while others countered the arguments of reformers.
These debates were carried out in public and in print.
Printed tracts and newspapers not only spread the new ideas, but they shaped the nature of the debate.
A wider public could now participate in these public discussions and express their views.
New ideas emerged through these clashes of opinions.
This was a time of intense controversies between social and religious reformers and the Hindu orthodoxy over matters like widow immolation, monotheism, Brahmanical priesthood and idolatry.
In Bengal, as the debate developed, tracts and newspapers proliferated, circulating a variety of arguments.
To reach a wider audience, the ideas were printed in the everyday, spoken language of ordinary people.
Rammohun Roy published the Sambad Kaumudi from 1821 and the Hindu orthodoxy commissioned the Samachar Chandrika to oppose his opinions.
From 1822, two Persian newspapers were published, Jam-i-Jahan Nama and Shamsul Akhbar.
In the same year, a Gujarati newspaper, the Bombay Samachar, made its appearance.
In north India, the ulama were deeply anxious about the collapse of Muslim dynasties.
They feared that colonial rulers would encourage conversion, change the Muslim personal laws.
To counter this, they used cheap lithographic presses, published Persian and Urdu translations of holy scriptures, and printed religious newspapers and tracts.
The Deoband Seminary, founded in 1867, published thousands upon thousands of fatwas telling Muslim readers how to conduct themselves in their everyday lives, and explaining the meanings of Islamic doctrines.
All through the nineteenth century, a number of Muslim sects and seminaries appeared, each with a different interpretation of faith, each keen on enlarging its following and countering the influence of its opponents.
Urdu print helped them conduct these battles in public.
Among Hindus, too, print encouraged the reading of religious texts, especially in the vernacular languages.
The first printed edition of the Ramcharitmanas of Tulsidas, a sixteenth-century text, came out from Calcutta in 1810.
By the mid-nineteenth century, cheap lithographic editions flooded north Indian markets.
From the 1880s, the Naval Kishore Press at Lucknow and the Shri Venkateshwar Press in Bombay published numerous religious texts in vernaculars.
In their printed and portable form, these could be read easily by the faithful at any place and time.
They could also be read out to large groups of illiterate men and women.
Religious texts, therefore, reached a very wide circle of people, encouraging discussions, debates and controversies within and among different religions.
Print did not only stimulate the publication of conflicting opinions amongst communities, but it also connected communities and people in different parts of India.
Newspapers conveyed news from one place to another, creating pan-Indian identities.
New Forms of Publication
Printing created an appetite for new kinds of writing.
As more and more people could now read, they wanted to see their own lives, experiences, emotions and relationships reflected in what they read.
The novel, a literary firm which had developed in Europe, ideally catered to this need.
It soon acquired distinctively Indian forms and styles.
For readers, it opened up new worlds of experience, and gave a vivid sense of the diversity of human lives.
Other new literary forms also entered the world of reading – lyrics, short stories, essays about social and political matters.
In different ways, they reinforced the new emphasis on human lives and intimate feelings, about the political and social rules that shaped such things.
By the end of the nineteenth century, a new visual culture was taking shape.
With the setting up of an increasing number of printing presses, visual images could be easily reproduced in multiple copies.
Painters like Raja Ravi Varma produced images for mass circulation.
Poor wood engravers who made woodblocks set up shop near the letterpresses, and were employed by print shops.
Cheap prints and calendars, easily available in the bazaar, could be bought even by the poor to decorate the walls of their homes or places of work.
These prints began shaping popular ideas about modernity and tradition, religion and politics, and society and culture.
By the 1870s, caricatures and cartoons were being published in journals and newspapers, commenting on social and political issues.
Some caricatures ridiculed the educated Indians’ fascination with Western tastes and clothes, while others expressed the fear of social change.
There were imperial caricatures lampooning nationalists, as well as nationalist cartoons criticising imperial rule.
Women and Print
Lives and feelings of women began to be written in particularly vivid and intense ways.
Women’s reading, therefore, increased enormously in middle-class homes.
Liberal husbands and fathers began educating their womenfolk at home, and sent them to schools when women’s schools were set up in the cities and towns after the mid-nineteenth century.
Many journals began carrying writings by women, and explained why women should be educated.
They also carried a syllabus and attached suitable reading matter which could be used for home-based schooling.
But not all families were liberal.
Conservative Hindus believed that a literate girl would be widowed and Muslims feared that educated women would be corrupted by reading Urdu romances.
Sometimes, rebel women defied such prohibition.
We know the story of a girl in a conservative Muslim family of north India who secretly learnt to read and write in Urdu.
Her family wanted her to read only the Arabic Quran which she did not understand.
So she insisted on learning to read a language that was her own.
In East Bengal, in the early nineteenth century, Rashsundari Debi, a young married girl in a very orthodox household, learnt to read in the secrecy of her kitchen.
Later, she wrote her autobiography Amar Jiban which was published in 1876.
It was the first full-length autobiography published in the Bengali language.
Since social reforms and novels had already created a great interest in women’s lives and emotions, there was also an interest in what women would have to say about their own lives.
From the 1860s, a few Bengali women like Kailashbashini Debi wrote books highlighting the experiences of women – about how women were imprisoned at home, kept in ignorance, forced to do hard domestic labour and treated unjustly by the very people they served.
In the 1880s, in present-day Maharashtra, Tarabai Shinde and Pandita Ramabai wrote with passionate anger about the miserable lives of upper-caste Hindu women, especially widows.
A woman in a Tamil novel expressed what reading meant to women who were so greatly confined by social regulations: ‘For various reasons, my world is small ... More than half my life’s happiness has come
While Urdu, Tamil, Bengali and Marathi print culture had developed early, Hindi printing began seriously only from the 1870s.
Soon, a large segment of it was devoted to the education of women.
In the early twentieth century, journals, written for and sometimes edited by women, became extremely popular.
They discussed issues like women’s education, widowhood, widow remarriage and the national movement.
Some of them offered household and fashion lessons to women and brought entertainment through short stories and serialised novels.
In Punjab, too, a similar folk literature was widely printed from the early twentieth century.
Ram Chaddha published the fast-selling Istri Dharm Vichar to teach women how to be obedient wives.
The Khalsa Tract Society published cheap booklets with a similar message.
Many of these were in the form of dialogues about the qualities of a good woman.
In Bengal, an entire area in central Calcutta – the Battala – was devoted to the printing of popular books.
Here you could buy cheap editions of religious tracts and scriptures, as well as literature that was considered obscene and scandalous.
By the late nineteenth century, a lot of these books were being profusely illustrated with woodcuts and coloured lithographs.
Pedlars took the Battala publications to homes, enabling women to read them in their leisure time.
Print and the Poor People
Very cheap small books were brought to markets in nineteenth-century Madras towns and sold at crossroads, allowing poor people travelling to markets to buy them.
Public libraries were set up from the early twentieth century, expanding the access to books.
These libraries were located mostly in cities and towns, and at times in prosperous villages.
For rich local patrons, setting up a library was a way of acquiring prestige.
From the late nineteenth century, issues of caste discrimination began to be written about in many printed tracts and essays.
Jyotiba Phule, the Maratha pioneer of ‘low caste’ protest movements, wrote about the injustices of the caste system in his Gulamgiri (1871).
In the twentieth century, B.R.
Ambedkar in Maharashtra and E.V.
Ramaswamy Naicker in Madras, better known as Periyar, wrote powerfully on caste and their writings were read by people all over India.
Local protest movements and sects also created a lot of popular journals and tracts criticising ancient scriptures and envisioning a new and just future.
Workers in factories were too overworked and lacked the education to write much about their experiences.
But Kashibaba, a Kanpur millworker, wrote and published Chhote Aur Bade Ka Sawal in 1938 to show the links between caste and class exploitation.
The poems of another Kanpur millworker, who wrote under the name of Sudarshan Chakr between 1935 and 1955, were brought together and published in a collection called Sacchi Kavitayan.
By the 1930s, Bangalore cotton millworkers set up libraries to educate themselves, following the example of Bombay workers.
These were sponsored by social reformers who tried to restrict excessive drinking among them, to bring literacy and, sometimes, to propagate the message of nationalism.
Print and Censorship
Before 1798, the colonial state under the East India Company was not too concerned with censorship.
Strangely, its early measures to control printed matter were directed against Englishmen in India who were critical of Company misrule and hated the actions of particular Company officers.
The Company was worried that such criticisms might be used by its critics in England to attack its trade monopoly in India.
By the 1820s, the Calcutta Supreme Court passed certain regulations to control press freedom and the Company began encouraging publication of newspapers that would celebrate Britsh rule.
In 1835, faced with urgent petitions by editors of English and vernacular newspapers, Governor-General Bentinck agreed to revise press laws.
Thomas Macaulay, a liberal colonial official, formulated new rules that restored the earlier freedoms.
After the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press changed.
Enraged Englishmen demanded a clamp down on the ‘native’ press.
As vernacular newspapers became assertively nationalist, the colonial government began debating measures of stringent control.
In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed, modelled on the Irish Press Laws.
It provided the government with extensive rights to censor reports and editorials in the vernacular press.
From now on the government kept regular track of the vernacular newspapers published in different provinces.
When a report was judged as seditious, the newspaper was warned, and if the warning was ignored, the press was liable to be seized and the printing machinery confiscated.
Despite repressive measures, nationalist newspapers grew in numbers in all parts of India.
They reported on colonial misrule and encouraged nationalist activities.
Attempts to throttle nationalist criticism provoked militant protest.
This in turn led to a renewed cycle of persecution and protests.
When Punjab revolutionaries were deported in 1907, Balgangadhar Tilak wrote with great sympathy about them in his Kesari.
This led to his imprisonment in 1908, provoking in turn widespread protests all over India.
As you have seen, modern nationalism in Europe came to be associated with the formation of nation-states.
It also meant a change in people’s understanding of who they were, and what defined their identity and sense of belonging.
New symbols and icons, new songs and ideas forged new links and redefined the boundaries of communities.
In most countries the making of this new national identity was a long process.
How did this consciousness emerge in India?
In India, as in Vietnam and many other colonies, the growth of modern nationalism is intimately connected to the anti-colonial movement.
People began discovering their unity in the process of their struggle with colonialism.
The sense of being oppressed under colonialism provided a shared bond that tied many different groups together.
But each class and group felt the effects of colonialism differently, their experiences were varied, and their notions of freedom were not always the same.
The Congress under Mahatma Gandhi tried to forge these groups together within one movement.
But the unity did not emerge without conflict.
In an earlier textbook you have read about the growth of nationalism in India up to the first decade of the twentieth century.
In this chapter we will pick up the story from the 1920s and study the Non- Cooperation and Civil Disobedience Movements.
We will explore how the Congress sought to develop the national movement, how different social groups participated in the movement, and how nationalism captured the imagination of people.
The First World War, Khilafat and Non-Cooperation
In the years after 1919, we see the national movement spreading to new areas, incorporating new social groups, and developing new modes of struggle.
How do we understand these developments?
What implications did they have?
First of all, the war created a new economic and political situation.
It led to a huge increase in defence expenditure which was financed by war loans and increasing taxes: customs duties were raised and income tax introduced.
Through the war years prices increased – doubling between 1913 and 1918 – leading to extreme hardship for the common people.
Villages were called upon to supply soldiers, and the forced recruitment in rural areas caused widespread anger.
Then in 1918-19 and 1920-21, crops failed in many parts of India, resulting in acute shortages of food.
This was accompanied by an influenza epidemic.
According to the census of 1921, 12 to 13 million people perished as a result of famines and the epidemic.
New words
People hoped that their hardships would end after the war was over.
But that did not happen.
At this stage a new leader appeared and suggested a new mode of struggle.
The Idea of Satyagraha
Mahatma Gandhi returned to India in January 1915.
As you know, he had come from South Africa where he had successfully fought the racist regime with a novel method of mass agitation, which he called satyagraha.
The idea of satyagraha emphasised the power of truth and the need to search for truth.
It suggested that if the cause was true, if the struggle was against injustice, then physical force was not necessary to fight the oppressor.
Without seeking vengeance or being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through non- violence.
This could be done by appealing to the conscience of the oppressor.
People – including the oppressors – had to be persuaded to see the truth, instead of being forced to accept truth through the use of violence.
By this struggle, truth was bound to ultimately triumph.
Mahatma Gandhi believed that this dharma of non-violence could unite all Indians.
After arriving in India, Mahatma Gandhi successfully organised satyagraha movements in various places.
In 1916 he travelled to Champaran in Bihar to inspire the peasants to struggle against the oppressive plantation system.
Then in 1917, he organised a satyagraha to support the peasants of the Kheda district of Gujarat.
Affected by crop failure and a plague epidemic, the peasants of Kheda could not pay the revenue, and were demanding that revenue collection be relaxed.
In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi went to Ahmedabad to organise a satyagraha movement amongst cotton mill workers.
The Rowlatt Act
Emboldened with this success, Gandhiji in 1919 decided to launch a nationwide satyagraha against the proposed Rowlatt Act (1919).
This Act had been hurriedly passed through the Imperial Legislative Council despite the united opposition of the Indian members.
It gave the government enormous powers to repress political activities, and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two years.
Mahatma Gandhi wanted non-violent civil disobedience against such unjust laws, which would start with a hartal on 6 April.
Rallies were organised in various cities, workers went on strike in railway workshops, and shops closed down.
Alarmed by the popular upsurge, and scared that lines of communication such as the railways and telegraph would be disrupted, the British administration decided to clamp down on nationalists.
Local leaders were picked up from Amritsar, and Mahatma Gandhi was barred from entering Delhi.
On 10 April, the police in Amritsar fired upon a peaceful procession, provoking widespread attacks on banks, post offices and railway stations.
Martial law was imposed and General Dyer took command.
On 13 April the infamous Jallianwalla Bagh incident took place.
On that day a large crowd gathered in the enclosed ground of Jallianwalla Bagh.
Some came to protest against the government’s new repressive measures.
Others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi fair.
Being from outside the city, many villagers were unaware of the martial law that had been imposed.
Dyer entered the area, blocked the exit points, and opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds.
His object, as he declared later, was to ‘produce a moral effect’, to create in the minds of satyagrahis a feeling of terror and awe.
As the news of Jallianwalla Bagh spread, crowds took to the streets in many north Indian towns.
There were strikes, clashes with the police and attacks on government buildings.
The government responded with brutal repression, seeking to humiliate and terrorise people: satyagrahis were forced to rub their noses on the ground, crawl on the streets, and do salaam (salute) to all sahibs; people were flogged and villages (around Gujranwala in Punjab, now in Pakistan) were bombed.
Seeing violence spread, Mahatma Gandhi called off the movement.
While the Rowlatt satyagraha had been a widespread movement, it was still limited mostly to cities and towns.
Mahatma Gandhi now felt the need to launch a more broad-based movement in India.
But he was certain that no such movement could be organised without bringing the Hindus and Muslims closer together.
One way of doing this, he felt, was to take up the Khilafat issue.
The First World War had ended with the defeat of Ottoman Turkey.
And there were rumours that a harsh peace treaty was going to be imposed on the Ottoman emperor – the spiritual head of the Islamic world (the Khalifa).
To defend the Khalifa’s temporal powers, a Khilafat Committee was formed in Bombay in March 1919.
A young generation of Muslim leaders like the brothers Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, began discussing with Mahatma Gandhi about the possibility of a united mass action on the issue.
Gandhiji saw this as an opportunity to bring Muslims under the umbrella of a unified national movement.
At the Calcutta session of the Congress in September 1920, he convinced other leaders of the need to start a non-cooperation movement in support of Khilafat as well as for swaraj.
Why Non-cooperation?
In his famous book Hind Swaraj (1909) Mahatma Gandhi declared that British rule was established in India with the cooperation of Indians, and had survived only because of this cooperation.
If Indians refused to cooperate, British rule in India would collapse within a year, and swaraj would come.
How could non-cooperation become a movement?
Gandhiji proposed that the movement should unfold in stages.
It should begin with the surrender of titles that the government awarded, and a boycott of civil services, army, police, courts and legislative councils, schools, and foreign goods.
Then, in case the government used repression, a full civil disobedience campaign would be launched.
Through the summer of 1920 Mahatma Gandhi and Shaukat Ali toured extensively, mobilising popular support for the movement.
Many within the Congress were, however, concerned about the proposals.
They were reluctant to boycott the council elections scheduled for November 1920, and they feared that the movement might lead to popular violence.
In the months between September and December there was an intense tussle within the Congress.
For a while there seemed no meeting point between the supporters and the opponents of the movement.
Finally, at the Congress session at Nagpur in December 1920, a compromise was worked out and the Non-Cooperation programme was adopted.
How did the movement unfold?
Who participated in it?
How did different social groups conceive of the idea of Non-Cooperation?
Differing Strands within the Movement
The Non-Cooperation-Khilafat Movement began in January 1921.
Various social groups participated in this movement, each with its own specific aspiration.
All of them responded to the call of Swaraj, but the term meant different things to different people.
The Movement in the Towns
The movement started with middle-class participation in the cities.
Thousands of students left government-controlled schools and colleges, headmasters and teachers resigned, and lawyers gave up their legal practices.
The council elections were boycotted in most provinces except Madras, where the Justice Party, the party of the non-Brahmans, felt that entering the council was one way of gaining some power – something that usually only Brahmans had access to.
The effects of non-cooperation on the economic front were more dramatic.
Foreign goods were boycotted, liquor shops picketed, and foreign cloth burnt in huge bonfires.
The import of foreign cloth halved between 1921 and 1922, its value dropping from Rs 102 crore to Rs 57 crore.
In many places merchants and traders refused to trade in foreign goods or finance foreign trade.
As the boycott movement spread, and people began discarding imported clothes and wearing only Indian ones, production of Indian textile mills and handlooms went up.
But this movement in the cities gradually slowed down for a variety of reasons.
Khadi cloth was often more expensive than mass- produced mill cloth and poor people could not afford to buy it.
How then could they boycott mill cloth for too long?
Similarly the boycott of British institutions posed a problem.
For the movement to be successful, alternative Indian institutions had to be set up so that they could be used in place of the British ones.
These were slow to come up.
So students and teachers began trickling back to government schools and lawyers joined back work in government courts.
Rebellion in the Countryside
From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the countryside.
It drew into its fold the struggles of peasants and tribals which were developing in different parts of India in the years after the war.
In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra – a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer.
The movement here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses.
Peasants had to do begar and work at landlords’ farms without any payment.
As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no right over the leased land.
The peasant movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar, and social boycott of oppressive landlords.
In many places nai – dhobi bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the services of even barbers and washermen.
In June 1920, Jawaharlal Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to understand their grievances.
By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra and a few others.
Within a month, over 300 branches had been set up in the villages around the region.
So when the Non- Cooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider struggle.
The peasant movement, however, developed in forms that the Congress leadership was unhappy with.
As the movement spread in 1921, the houses of talukdars and merchants were attacked, bazaars were looted, and grain hoards were taken over.
In many places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that no taxes were to be paid and land was to be redistributed among the poor.
The name of the Mahatma was being invoked to sanction all action and aspirations.
Tribal peasants interpreted the message of Mahatma Gandhi and the idea of swaraj in yet another way.
In the Gudem Hills of Andhra Pradesh, for instance, a militant guerrilla movement spread in the early 1920s – not a form of struggle that the Congress could approve.
Here, as in other forest regions, the colonial government had closed large forest areas, preventing people from entering the forests to graze their cattle, or to collect fuelwood and fruits.
This enraged the hill people.
Not only were their livelihoods affected but they felt that their traditional rights were being denied.
When the government began forcing them to contribute begar for road building, the hill people revolted.
The person who came to lead them was an interesting figure.
Alluri Sitaram Raju claimed that he had a variety of special powers: he could make correct astrological predictions and heal people, and he could survive even bullet shots.
Captivated by Raju, the rebels proclaimed that he was an incarnation of God.
Raju talked of the greatness of Mahatma Gandhi, said he was inspired by the Non-Cooperation Movement, and persuaded people to wear khadi and give up drinking.
But at the same time he asserted that India could be liberated only by the use of force, not non-violence.
The Gudem rebels attacked police stations, attempted to kill British officials and carried on guerrilla warfare for achieving swaraj.
Raju was captured and executed in 1924, and over time became a folk hero.
Swaraj in the Plantations
Workers too had their own understanding of Mahatma Gandhi and the notion of swaraj.
For plantation workers in Assam, freedom meant the right to move freely in and out of the confined space in which they were enclosed, and it meant retaining a link with the village from which they had come.
Under the Inland Emigration Act of 1859, plantation workers were not permitted to leave the tea gardens without permission, and in fact they were rarely given such permission.
When they heard of the Non-Cooperation Movement, thousands of workers defied the authorities, left the plantations and headed home.
They believed that Gandhi Raj was coming and everyone would be given land in their own villages.
They, however, never reached their destination.
Stranded on the way by a railway and steamer strike, they were caught by the police and brutally beaten up.
The visions of these movements were not defined by the Congress programme.
They interpreted the term swaraj in their own ways, imagining it to be a time when all suffering and all troubles would be over.
Yet, when the tribals chanted Gandhiji’s name and raised slogans demanding ‘Swatantra Bharat’, they were also emotionally relating to an all-India agitation.
When they acted in the name of Mahatma Gandhi, or linked their movement to that of the Congress, they were identifying with a movement which went beyond the limits of their immediate locality.
Towards Civil Disobedience
In February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement.
He felt the movement was turning violent in many places and satyagrahis needed to be properly trained before they would be ready for mass struggles.
Within the Congress, some leaders were by now tired of mass struggles and wanted to participate in elections to the provincial councils that had been set up by the Government of India Act of 1919.
They felt that it was important to oppose British policies within the councils, argue for reform and also demonstrate that these councils were not truly democratic.
C. R. Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Swaraj Party within the Congress to argue for a return to council politics.
But younger leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose pressed for more radical mass agitation and for full independence.
In such a situation of internal debate and dissension two factors again shaped Indian politics towards the late 1920s.
The first was the effect of the worldwide economic depression.
Agricultural prices began to fall from 1926 and collapsed after 1930.
As the demand for agricultural goods fell and exports declined, peasants found it difficult to sell their harvests and pay their revenue.
By 1930, the countryside was in turmoil.
Against this background the new Tory government in Britain constituted a Statutory Commission under Sir John Simon.
Set up in response to the nationalist movement, the commission was to look into the functioning of the constitutional system in India and suggest changes.
The problem was that the commission did not have a single Indian member.
They were all British.
When the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928, it was greeted with the slogan ‘Go back Simon’.
All parties, including the Congress and the Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations.
In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer of ‘dominion status’ for India in an unspecified future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a future constitution.
This did not satisfy the Congress leaders.
The radicals within the Congress, led by Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose, became more assertive.
The liberals and moderates, who were proposing a constitutional system within the framework of British dominion, gradually lost their influence.
In December 1929, under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru, the Lahore Congress formalised the demand of ‘Purna Swaraj’ or full independence for India.
It was declared that 26 January 1930, would be celebrated as the Independence Day when people were to take a pledge to struggle for complete independence.
But the celebrations attracted very little attention.
So Mahatma Gandhi had to find a way to relate this abstract idea of freedom to more concrete issues of everyday life.
The Salt March and the Civil Disobedience Movement
Mahatma Gandhi found in salt a powerful symbol that could unite the nation.
On 31 January 1930, he sent a letter to Viceroy Irwin stating eleven demands.
Some of these were of general interest; others were specific demands of different classes, from industrialists to peasants.
The idea was to make the demands wide-ranging, so that all classes within Indian society could identify with them and everyone could be brought together in a united campaign.
The most stirring of all was the demand to abolish the salt tax.
Salt was something consumed by the rich and the poor alike, and it was one of the most essential items of food.
The tax on salt and the government monopoly over its production, Mahatma Gandhi declared, revealed the most oppressive face of British rule.
Mahatma Gandhi’s letter was, in a way, an ultimatum.
If the demands were not fulfilled by 11 March, the letter stated, the Congress would launch a civil disobedience campaign.
Irwin was unwilling to negotiate.
So Mahatma Gandhi started his famous salt march accompanied by 78 of his trusted volunteers.
The march was over 240 miles, from Gandhiji’s ashram in Sabarmati to the Gujarati coastal town of Dandi.
The volunteers walked for 24 days, about 10 miles a day.
Thousands came to hear Mahatma Gandhi wherever he stopped, and he told them what he meant by swaraj and urged them to peacefully defy the British.
On 6 April he reached Dandi, and ceremonially violated the law, manufacturing salt by boiling sea water.
This marked the beginning of the Civil Disobedience Movement.
How was this movement different from the Non-Cooperation Movement?
People were now asked not only to refuse cooperation with the British, as they had done in 1921-22, but also to break colonial laws.
Thousands in different parts of the country broke the salt law, manufactured salt and demonstrated in front of government salt factories.
As the movement spread, foreign cloth was boycotted, and liquor shops were picketed.
Peasants refused to pay revenue and chaukidari taxes, village officials resigned, and in many places forest people violated forest laws – going into Reserved Forests to collect wood and graze cattle.
Worried by the developments, the colonial government began arresting the Congress leaders one by one.
This led to violent clashes in many palaces.
When Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a devout disciple of Mahatma Gandhi, was arrested in April 1930, angry crowds demonstrated in the streets of Peshawar, facing armoured cars and police firing.
Many were killed.
A month later, when Mahatma Gandhi himself was arrested, industrial workers in Sholapur attacked police posts, municipal buildings, lawcourts and railway stations – all structures that symbolised British rule.
A frightened government responded with a policy of brutal repression.
Peaceful satyagrahis were attacked, women and children were beaten, and about 100,000 people were arrested.
In such a situation, Mahatma Gandhi once again decided to call off the movement and entered into a pact with Irwin on 5 March 1931.
By this Gandhi-Irwin Pact, Gandhiji consented to participate in a Round Table Conference (the Congress had boycotted the first Round Table Conference) in London and the government agreed to Box 1 release the political prisoners.
In December 1931, Gandhiji went to London for the conference, but the negotiations broke down and he returned disappointed.
Back in India, he discovered that the government had begun a new cycle of repression.
Ghaffar Khan and Jawaharlal Nehru were both in jail, the Congress had been declared illegal, and a series of measures had been imposed to prevent meetings, demonstrations and boycotts.
With great apprehension, Mahatma Gandhi relaunched the Civil Disobedience Movement.
For over a year, the movement continued, but by 1934 it lost its momentum.
How Participants saw the Movement
In the countryside, rich peasant communities – like the Patidars of Gujarat and the Jats of Uttar Pradesh – were active in the movement.
Being producers of commercial crops, they were very hard hit by the trade depression and falling prices.
As their cash income disappeared, they found it impossible to pay the government’s revenue demand.
And the refusal of the government to reduce the revenue demand led to widespread resentment.
These rich peasants became enthusiastic supporters of the Civil Disobedience Movement, organising their communities, and at times forcing reluctant members, to participate in the boycott programmes.
For them the fight for swaraj was a struggle against high revenues.
But they were deeply disappointed when the movement was called off in 1931 without the revenue rates being revised.
So when the movement was restarted in 1932, many of them refused to participate.
The poorer peasantry were not just interested in the lowering of the revenue demand.
Many of them were small tenants cultivating land they had rented from landlords.
As the Depression continued and cash incomes dwindled, the small tenants found it difficult to pay their rent.
They wanted the unpaid rent to the landlord to be remitted.
They joined a variety of radical movements, often led by Socialists and Communists.
Apprehensive of raising issues that might upset the rich peasants and landlords, the Congress was unwilling to support ‘no rent’ campaigns in most places.
So the relationship between the poor peasants and the Congress remained uncertain.
What about the business classes?
How did they relate to the Civil Disobedience Movement?
During the First World War, Indian merchants and industrialists had made huge profits and become powerful (see Chapter 5).
Keen on expanding their business, they now reacted against colonial policies that restricted business activities.
They wanted protection against imports of foreign goods, and a rupee-sterling foreign exchange ratio that would discourage imports.
To organise business interests, they formed the Indian Industrial and Commercial Congress in 1920 and the Federation of the Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI) in 1927.
Led by prominent industrialists like Purshottamdas Thakurdas and G. D. Birla, the industrialists attacked colonial control over the Indian economy, and supported the Civil Disobedience Movement when it was first launched.
They gave financial assistance and refused to buy or sell imported goods.
Most businessmen came to see swaraj as a time when colonial restrictions on business would no longer exist and trade and industry would flourish without constraints.
But after the failure of the Round Table Conference, business groups were no longer uniformly enthusiastic.
They were apprehensive of the spread of militant activities, and worried about prolonged disruption of business, as well as of the growing influence of socialism amongst the younger members of the Congress.
The industrial working classes did not participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement in large numbers, except in the Nagpur region.
As the industrialists came closer to the Congress, workers stayed aloof.
But in spite of that, some workers did participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement, selectively adopting some of the ideas of the Gandhian programme, like boycott of foreign goods, as part of their own movements against low wages and poor working conditions.
There were strikes by railway workers in 1930 and dockworkers in 1932.
In 1930 thousands of workers in Chotanagpur tin mines wore Gandhi caps and participated in protest rallies and boycott campaigns.
But the Congress was reluctant to include workers’ demands as part of its programme of struggle.
It felt that this would alienate industrialists and divide the anti- imperial forces.
Another important feature of the Civil Disobedience Movement was the large-scale participation of women.
During Gandhiji’s salt march, thousands of women came out of their homes to listen to him.
They participated in protest marches, manufactured salt, and picketed foreign cloth and liquor shops.
Many went to jail.
In urban areas these women were from high-caste families; in rural areas they came from rich peasant households.
Moved by Gandhiji’s call, they began to see service to the nation as a sacred duty of women.
Yet, this increased public role did not necessarily mean any radical change in the way the position of women was visualised.
Gandhiji was convinced that it was the duty of women to look after home and hearth, be good mothers and good wives.
And for a long time the Congress was reluctant to allow women to hold any position of authority within the organisation.
It was keen only on their symbolic presence.
The Limits of Civil Disobedience
Not all social groups were moved by the abstract concept of swaraj.
One such group was the nation’s ‘untouchables’, who from around the 1930s had begun to call themselves dalit or oppressed.
For long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending the sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus.
But Mahatma Gandhi declared that swaraj would not come for a hundred years if untouchability was not eliminated.
He called the ‘untouchables’ harijan, or the children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them entry into temples, and access to public wells, tanks, roads and schools.
He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the bhangi (the sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change their heart and give up ‘the sin of untouchability’.
But many dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the problems of the community.
They began organising themselves, demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a separate electorate that would choose dalit members for legislative councils.
Political empowerment, they believed, would resolve the problems of their social disabilities.
Dalit participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement was therefore limited, particularly in the Maharashtra and Nagpur region where their organisation was quite strong.
Dr B.R.
Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference by demanding separate electorates for dalits.
When the British government conceded Ambedkar’s demand, Gandhiji began a fast unto death.
He believed that separate electorates for dalits would slow down the process of their integration into society.
Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji’s position and the result was the Poona Pact of September 1932.
It gave the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils, but they were to be voted in by the general electorate.
The dalit movement, however, continued to be apprehensive of the Congress- led national movement.
Some of the Muslim political organisations in India were also lukewarm in their response to the Civil Disobedience Movement.
After the decline of the Non-Cooperation-Khilafat movement, a large section of Muslims felt alienated from the Congress.
From the mid-1920s the Congress came to be more visibly associated with openly Hindu religious nationalist groups like the Hindu Mahasabha.
As relations between Hindus and Muslims worsened, each community organised religious processions with militant fervour, provoking Hindu-Muslim communal clashes and riots in various cities.
Every riot deepened the distance between the two communities.
The Congress and the Muslim League made efforts to renegotiate an alliance, and in 1927 it appeared that such a unity could be forged.
The important differences were over the question of representation in the future assemblies that were to be elected.
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, one of the leaders of the Muslim League, was willing to give up the demand for separate electorates, if Muslims were assured reserved seats in the Central Assembly and representation in proportion to population in the Muslim-dominated provinces (Bengal and Punjab).
Negotiations over the question of representation continued but all hope of resolving the issue at the All Parties Conference in 1928 disappeared when M.R.
Jayakar of the Hindu Mahasabha strongly opposed efforts at compromise.
When the Civil Disobedience Movement started there was thus an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust between communities.
Alienated from the Congress, large sections of Muslims could not respond to the call for a united struggle.
Many Muslim leaders and intellectuals expressed their concern about the status of Muslims as a minority within India.
They feared that the culture and identity of minorities would be submerged under the domination of a Hindu majority.
The Sense of Collective Belonging
Nationalism spreads when people begin to believe that they are all part of the same nation, when they discover some unity that binds them together.
But how did the nation become a reality in the minds of people?
How did people belonging to different communities, regions or language groups develop a sense of collective belonging?
This sense of collective belonging came partly through the experience of united struggles.
But there were also a variety of cultural processes through which nationalism captured people’s imagination.
History and fiction, folklore and songs, popular prints and symbols, all played a part in the making of nationalism.
The identity of the nation, as you know (see Chapter 1), is most often symbolised in a figure or image.
This helps create an image with which people can identify the nation.
It was in the twentieth century, with the growth of nationalism, that the identity of India came to be visually associated with the image of Bharat Mata.
The image was first created by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay.
In the 1870s he wrote ‘Vande Mataram’ as a hymn to the motherland.
Later it was included in his novel Anandamath and widely sung during the Swadeshi movement in Bengal.
Moved by the Swadeshi movement, Abanindranath Tagore painted his famous image of Bharat Mata (see Fig.
12).
In this painting Bharat Mata is portrayed as an ascetic figure; she is calm, composed, divine and spiritual.
In subsequent years, the image of Bharat Mata acquired many different forms, as it circulated in popular prints, and was painted by different artists (see Fig.
14).
Devotion to this mother figure came to be seen as evidence of one’s nationalism.
Ideas of nationalism also developed through a movement to revive Indian folklore.
In late-nineteenth-century India, nationalists began recording folk tales sung by bards and they toured villages to gather folk songs and legends.
These tales, they believed, gave a true picture of traditional culture that had been corrupted and damaged by outside forces.
It was essential to preserve this folk tradition in order to discover one’s national identity and restore a sense of pride in one’s past.
In Bengal, Rabindranath Tagore himself began collecting ballads, nursery rhymes and myths, and led the movement for folk revival.
In Madras, Natesa Sastri published a massive four-volume collection of Tamil folk tales, The Folklore of Southern India.
He believed that folklore was national literature; it was ‘the most trustworthy manifestation of people’s real thoughts and characteristics’.
As the national movement developed, nationalist leaders became more and more aware of such icons and symbols in unifying people and inspiring in them a feeling of nationalism.
During the Swadeshi movement in Bengal, a tricolour flag (red, green and yellow) was designed.
It had eight lotuses representing eight provinces of British India, and a crescent moon, representing Hindus and Muslims.
By 1921, Gandhiji had designed the Swaraj flag.
It was again a tricolour (red, green and white) and had a spinning wheel in the centre, representing the Gandhian ideal of self-help.
Carrying the flag, holding it aloft, during marches became a symbol of defiance.
Another means of creating a feeling of nationalism was through reinterpretation of history.
By the end of the nineteenth century many Indians began feeling that to instill a sense of pride in the nation, Indian history had to be thought about differently.
The British saw Indians as backward and primitive, incapable of governing themselves.
In response, Indians began looking into the past to discover India’s great achievements.
They wrote about the glorious developments in ancient times when art and architecture, science and mathematics, religion and culture, law and philosophy, crafts and trade had flourished.
This glorious time, in their view, was followed by a history of decline, when India was colonised.
These nationalist histories urged the readers to take pride in India’s great achievements in the past and struggle to change the miserable conditions of life under British rule.
These efforts to unify people were not without problems.
When the past being glorified was Hindu, when the images celebrated were drawn from Hindu iconography, then people of other communities felt left out.
Conclusion
A growing anger against the colonial government was thus bringing together various groups and classes of Indians into a common struggle for freedom in the first half of the twentieth century.
The Congress under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi tried to channel people’s grievances into organised movements for independence.
Through such movements the nationalists tried to forge a national unity.
But as we have seen, diverse groups and classes participated in these movements with varied aspirations and expectations.
As their grievances were wide-ranging, freedom from colonial rule also meant different things to different people.
The Congress continuously attempted to resolve differences, and ensure that the demands of one group did not alienate another.
This is precisely why the unity within the movement often broke down.
The high points of Congress activity and nationalist unity were followed by phases of disunity and inner conflict between groups.
In other words, what was emerging was a nation with many voices wanting freedom from colonial rule.
In 1900, a popular music publisher E.T.
Paull produced a music book that had a picture on the cover page announcing the ‘Dawn of the Century’ (Fig.
1).
As you can see from the illustration, at the centre of the picture is a goddess-like figure, the angel of progress, bearing the flag of the new century.
She is gently perched on a wheel with wings, symbolising time.
Her flight is taking her into the future.
Floating about, behind her, are the signs of progress: railway, camera, machines, printing press and factory.
This glorification of machines and technology is even more marked in a picture which appeared on the pages of a trade magazine over a hundred years ago (Fig.
2).
It shows two magicians.
The one at the top is Aladdin from the Orient who built a beautiful palace with his magic lamp.
The one at the bottom is the modern mechanic, who with his modern tools weaves a new magic: builds bridges, ships, towers and high-rise buildings.
Aladdin is shown as representing the East and the past, the mechanic stands for the West and modernity.
These images offer us a triumphant account of the modern world.
Within this account the modern world is associated with rapid technological change and innovations, machines and factories, railways and steamships.
The history of industrialisation thus becomes simply a story of development, and the modern age appears as a wonderful time of technological progress.
These images and associations have now become part of popular imagination.
Do you not see rapid industrialisation as a time of progress and modernity?
Do you not think that the spread of railways and factories, and construction of high-rise buildings and bridges is a sign of society’s development?
How have these images developed?
And how do we relate to these ideas?
Is industrialisation always based on rapid technological development?
Can we today continue to glorify continuous mechanisation of all work?
What has industrialisation meant to people’s lives?
To answer such questions we need to turn to the history of industrialisation.
In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain, the first industrial nation, and then India, where the pattern of industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule.
Before the Industrial Revolution
All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of factory industry.
When we talk of industrial production we refer to factory production.
When we talk of industrial workers we mean factory workers.
Histories of industrialisation very often begin with the setting up of the first factories.
There is a problem with such ideas.
Even before factories began to dot the landscape in England and Europe, there was large-scale industrial production for an international market.
This was not based on factories.
Many historians now refer to this phase of industrialisation as proto-industrialisation.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns in Europe began moving to the countryside, supplying money to peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an international market.
With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of colonies in different parts of the world, the demand for goods began growing.
But merchants could not expand production within towns.
This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were powerful.
These were associations of producers that trained craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into the trade.
Rulers granted different guilds the monopoly right to produce and trade in specific products.
It was therefore difficult for new merchants to set up business in towns.
So they turned to the countryside.
In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began working for merchants.
As you have seen in the textbook last year, this was a time when open fields were disappearing and commons were being enclosed.
Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier depended on common lands for their survival, gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and straw, had to now look for alternative sources of income.
Many had tiny plots of land which could not provide work for all members of the household.
So when merchants came around and offered advances to produce goods for them, peasant households eagerly agreed.
By working for the merchants, they could remain in the countryside and continue to cultivate their small plots.
Income from proto-industrial production supplemented their shrinking income from cultivation.
It also allowed them a fuller use of their family labour resources.
Within this system a close relationship developed between the town and the countryside.
Merchants were based in towns but the work was done mostly in the countryside.
A merchant clothier in England purchased wool from a wool stapler, and carried it to the spinners; the yarn (thread) that was spun was taken in subsequent stages of production to weavers, fullers, and then to dyers.
The finishing was done in London before the export merchant sold the cloth in the international market.
London in fact came to be known as a finishing centre.
This proto-industrial system was thus part of a network of commercial exchanges.
It was controlled by merchants and the goods were produced by a vast number of producers working within their family farms, not in factories.
At each stage of production 20 to 25 workers were employed by each merchant.
This meant that each clothier was controlling hundreds of workers.
The Coming Up of the Factory
The earliest factories in England came up by the 1730s.
But it was only in the late eighteenth century that the number of factories multiplied.
The first symbol of the new era was cotton.
Its production boomed in the late nineteenth century.
In 1760 Britain was importing 2.5 million pounds of raw cotton to feed its cotton industry.
By 1787 this import soared to 22 million pounds.
This increase was linked to a number of changes within the process of production.
Let us look briefly at some of these.
A series of inventions in the eighteenth century increased the efficacy of each step of the production process (carding, twisting and spinning, and rolling).
They enhanced the output per worker, enabling each worker to produce more, and they made possible the production of stronger threads and yarn.
Then Richard Arkwright created the cotton mill.
Till this time, as you have seen, cloth production was spread all over the countryside and carried out within village households.
But now, the costly new machines could be purchased, set up and maintained in the mill.
Within the mill all the processes were brought together under one roof and management.
This allowed a more careful supervision over the production process, a watch over quality, and the regulation of labour, all of which had been difficult to do when production was in the countryside.
In the early nineteenth century, factories increasingly became an intimate part of the English landscape.
So visible were the imposing new mills, so magical seemed to be the power of new technology, that contemporaries were dazzled.
They concentrated their attention on the mills, almost forgetting the bylanes and the workshops where production still continued.
The Pace of Industrial Change
How rapid was the process of industrialisation?
Does industrialisation mean only the growth of factory industries?
First: The most dynamic industries in Britain were clearly cotton and metals.
Growing at a rapid pace, cotton was the leading sector in the first phase of industrialisation up to the 1840s.
After that the iron and steel industry led the way.
With the expansion of railways, in England from the 1840s and in the colonies from the 1860s, the demand for iron and steel increased rapidly.
By 1873 Britain was exporting iron and steel worth about £ 77 million, double the value of its cotton export.
Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional industries.
Even at the end of the nineteenth century, less than 20 per cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically advanced industrial sectors.
Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a large portion of the output was produced not within factories, but outside, within domestic units.
Third: the pace of change in the ‘traditional’ industries was not set by steam-powered cotton or metal industries, but they did not remain entirely stagnant either.
Seemingly ordinary and small innovations were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as food processing, building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture making, and production of implements.
Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly.
They did not spread dramatically across the industrial landscape.
New technology was expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious about using it.
The machines often broke down and repair was costly.
They were not as effective as their inventors and manufacturers claimed.
Consider the case of the steam engine.
James Watt improved the steam engine produced by Newcomen and patented the new engine in 1781.
His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the new model.
But for years he could find no buyers.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there were no more than 321 steam engines all over England.
Of these, 80 were in cotton industries, nine in wool industries, and the rest in mining, canal works and iron works.
Steam engines were not used in any of the other industries till much later in the century.
So even the most powerful new technology that enhanced the productivity of labour manifold was slow to be accepted by industrialists.
Historians now have come to increasingly recognise that the typical worker in the mid-nineteenth century was not a machine operator but the traditional craftsperson and labourer.
Hand Labour and Steam Power
In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of human labour.
Poor peasants and vagrants moved to the cities in large numbers in search of jobs, waiting for work.
As you will know, when there is plenty of labour, wages are low.
So industrialists had no problem of labour shortage or high wage costs.
They did not want to introduce machines that got rid of human labour and required large capital investment.
In many industries the demand for labour was seasonal.
Gas works and breweries were especially busy through the cold months.
So they needed more workers to meet their peak demand.
Book- binders and printers, catering to Christmas demand, too needed extra hands before December.
At the waterfront, winter was the time that ships were repaired and spruced up.
In all such industries where production fluctuated with the season, industrialists usually preferred hand labour, employing workers for the season.
A range of products could be produced only with hand labour.
Machines were oriented to producing uniforms, standardised goods for a mass market.
But the demand in the market was often for goods with intricate designs and specific shapes.
In mid-nineteenth-century Britain, for instance, 500 varieties of hammers were produced and 45 kinds of axes.
These required human skill, not mechanical technology.
In Victorian Britain, the upper classes – the aristocrats and the bourgeoisie – preferred things produced by hand.
Handmade products came to symbolise refinement and class.
They were better finished, individually produced, and carefully designed.
Machine- made goods were for export to the colonies.
In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using mechanical power so that the need for human labour can be minimised.
This was the case in nineteenth-century America.
Britain, however, had no problem hiring human hands.
Life of the Workers
The abundance of labour in the market affected the lives of workers.
As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds tramped to the cities.
The actual possibility of getting a job depended on existing networks of friendship and kin relations.
If you had a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a job quickly.
But not everyone had social connections.
Many job- seekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in night shelters.
Some stayed in Night Refuges that were set up by private individuals; others went to the Casual Wards maintained by the Poor Law authorities.
Seasonality of work in many industries meant prolonged periods without work.
After the busy season was over, the poor were on the streets again.
Some returned to the countryside after the winter, when the demand for labour in the rural areas opened up in places.
But most looked for odd jobs, which till the mid-nineteenth century were difficult to find.
Wages increased somewhat in the early nineteenth century.
But they tell us little about the welfare of the workers.
The average figures hide the variations between trades and the fluctuations from year to year.
For instance, when prices rose sharply during the prolonged Napoleonic War, the real value of what the workers earned fell significantly, since the same wages could now buy fewer things.
Moreover, the income of workers depended not on the wage rate alone.
What was also critical was the period of employment: the number of days of work determined the average daily income of the workers.
At the best of times till the mid-nineteenth century, about 10 per cent of the urban population were extremely poor.
In periods of economic slump, like the 1830s, the proportion of unemployed went up to anything between 35 and 75 per cent in different regions.
The fear of unemployment made workers hostile to the introduction of new technology.
When the Spinning Jenny was introduced in the woollen industry, women who survived on hand spinning began attacking the new machines.
This conflict over the introduction of the jenny continued for a long time.
After the 1840s, building activity intensified in the cities, opening up greater opportunities of employment.
Roads were widened, new railway stations came up, railway lines were extended, tunnels dug, drainage and sewers laid, rivers embanked.
The number of workers employed in the transport industry doubled in the 1840s, and doubled again in the subsequent 30 years.
Industrialisation in the Colonies
Let us now move to India to see how a colony industrialises.
Once again we will look not only at factory industries but also at the non-mechanised sector.
We will limit our discussion primarily to textile industries.
The Age of Indian Textiles
Before the age of machine industries, silk and cotton goods from India dominated the international market in textiles.
Coarser cottons were produced in many countries, but the finer varieties often came from India.
Armenian and Persian merchants took the goods from Punjab to Afghanistan, eastern Persia and Central Asia.
Bales of fine textiles were carried on camel back via the north-west frontier, through mountain passes and across deserts.
A vibrant sea trade operated through the main pre-colonial ports.
Surat on the Gujarat coast connected India to the Gulf and Red Sea Ports; Masulipatam on the Coromandel coast and Hoogly in Bengal had trade links with Southeast Asian ports.
A variety of Indian merchants and bankers were involved in this network of export trade – financing production, carrying goods and supplying exporters.
Supply merchants linked the port towns to the inland regions.
They gave advances to weavers, procured the woven cloth from weaving villages, and carried the supply to the ports.
At the port, the big shippers and export merchants had brokers who negotiated the price and bought goods from the supply merchants operating inland.
By the 1750s this network, controlled by Indian merchants, was breaking down.
The European companies gradually gained power – first securing a variety of concessions from local courts, then the monopoly rights to trade.
This resulted in a decline of the old ports of Surat and Hoogly through which local merchants had operated.
Exports from these ports fell dramatically, the credit that had financed the earlier trade began drying up, and the local bankers slowly went bankrupt.
In the last years of the seventeenth century, the gross value of trade that passed through Surat had been Rs 16 million.
By the 1740s it had slumped to Rs 3 million.
While Surat and Hoogly decayed, Bombay and Calcutta grew.
This shift from the old ports to the new ones was an indicator of the growth of colonial power.
Trade through the new ports came to be controlled by European companies, and was carried in European ships.
While many of the old trading houses collapsed, those that wanted to survive had to now operate within a network shaped by European trading companies.
How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans?
What Happened to Weavers?
The consolidation of East India Company power after the 1760s did not initially lead to a decline in textile exports from India.
British cotton industries had not yet expanded and Indian fine textiles were in great demand in Europe.
So the company was keen on expanding textile exports from India.
Before establishing political power in Bengal and Carnatic in the 1760s and 1770s, the East India Company had found it difficult to ensure a regular supply of goods for export.
The French, Dutch, Portuguese as well as the local traders competed in the market to secure woven cloth.
So the weaver and supply merchants could bargain and try selling the produce to the best buyer.
In their letters back to London, Company officials continuously complained of difficulties of supply and the high prices.
However, once the East India Company established political power, it could assert a monopoly right to trade.
It proceeded to develop a system of management and control that would eliminate competition, control costs, and ensure regular supplies of cotton and silk goods.
This it did through a series of steps.
First: the Company tried to eliminate the existing traders and brokers connected with the cloth trade, and establish a more direct control over the weaver.
It appointed a paid servant called the gomastha to supervise weavers, collect supplies, and examine the quality of cloth.
Second: it prevented Company weavers from dealing with other buyers.
One way of doing this was through the system of advances.
Once an order was placed, the weavers were given loans to purchase the raw material for their production.
Those who took loans had to hand over the cloth they produced to the gomastha.
They could not take it to any other trader.
As loans flowed in and the demand for fine textiles expanded, weavers eagerly took the advances, hoping to earn more.
Many weavers had small plots of land which they had earlier cultivated along with weaving, and the produce from this took care of their family needs.
Now they had to lease out the land and devote all their time to weaving.
Weaving, in fact, required the labour of the entire family, with children and women all engaged in different stages of the process.
Soon, however, in many weaving villages there were reports of clashes between weavers and gomasthas.
Earlier supply merchants had very often lived within the weaving villages, and had a close relationship with the weavers, looking after their needs and helping them in times of crisis.
The new gomasthas were outsiders, with no long-term social link with the village.
They acted arrogantly, marched into villages with sepoys and peons, and punished weavers for delays in supply – often beating and flogging them.
The weavers lost the space to bargain for prices and sell to different buyers: the price they received from the Company was miserably low and the loans they had accepted tied them to the Company.
In many places in Carnatic and Bengal, weavers deserted villages and migrated, setting up looms in other villages where they had some family relation.
Elsewhere, weavers along with the village traders revolted, opposing the Company and its officials.
Over time many weavers began refusing loans, closing down their workshops and taking to agricultural labour.
By the turn of the nineteenth century, cotton weavers faced a new set of problems.
Manchester Comes to India
In 1772, Henry Patullo, a Company official, had ventured to say that the demand for Indian textiles could never reduce, since no other nation produced goods of the same quality.
Yet by the beginning of the nineteenth century we see the beginning of a long decline of textile exports from India.
In 1811-12 piece-goods accounted for 33 per cent of India’s exports; by 1850-51 it was no more than 3 per cent.
Why did this happen?
What were its implications?
As cotton industries developed in England, industrial groups began worrying about imports from other countries.
They pressurised the government to impose import duties on cotton textiles so that Manchester goods could sell in Britain without facing any competition from outside.
At the same time industrialists persuaded the East India Company to sell British manufactures in Indian markets as well.
Exports of British cotton goods increased dramatically in the early nineteenth century.
At the end of the eighteenth century there had been virtually no import of cotton piece-goods into India.
But by 1850 cotton piece-goods constituted over 31 per cent of the value of Indian imports; and by the 1870s this figure was over 50 per cent.
Cotton weavers in India thus faced two problems at the same time: their export market collapsed, and the local market shrank, being glutted with Manchester imports.
Produced by machines at lower costs, the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could not easily compete with them.
By the 1850s, reports from most weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation.
By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem.
They could not get sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality.
When the American Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut off, Britain turned to India.
As raw cotton exports from India increased, the price of raw cotton shot up.
Weavers in India were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at exorbitant prices.
In this, situation weaving could not pay.
Industrialisation
Then, by the end of the nineteenth century, weavers and other craftspeople faced yet another problem.
Factories in India began production, flooding the market with machine- goods.
How could weaving industries possibly survive?
Factories Come Up
The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854 and it went into production two years later.
By 1862 four mills were at work with 94,000 spindles and 2,150 looms.
Around the same time jute mills came up in Bengal, the first being set up in 1855 and another one seven years later, in 1862.
In north India, the Elgin Mill was started in Kanpur in the 1860s, and a year later the first cotton mill of Ahmedabad was set up.
By 1874, the first spinning and weaving mill of Madras began production.
Who set up the industries?
Where did the capital come from?
Who came to work in the mills?
The Early Entrepreneurs
Industries were set up in different regions by varying sorts of people.
Let us see who they were.
The history of many business groups goes back to trade with China.
From the late eighteenth century, as you have read in your book last year, the British in India began exporting opium to China and took tea from China to England.
Many Indians became junior players in this trade, providing finance, procuring supplies, and shipping consignments.
Having earned through trade, some of these businessmen had visions of developing industrial enterprises in India.
In Bengal, Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in the China trade before he turned to industrial investment, setting up six joint-stock companies in the 1830s and 1840s.
Tagore’s enterprises sank along with those of others in the wider business crises of the 1840s, but later in the nineteenth century many of the China traders became successful industrialists.
In Bombay, Parsis like Dinshaw Petit and Jamsetjee Nusserwanjee Tata who built huge industrial empires in India, accumulated their initial wealth partly from exports to China, and partly from raw cotton shipments to England.
Seth Hukumchand, a Marwari businessman who set up the first Indian jute mill in Calcutta in 1917, also traded with China.
So did the father as well as grandfather of the famous industrialist G.D. Birla.
Capital was accumulated through other trade networks.
Some merchants from Madras traded with Burma while others had links with the Middle East and East Africa.
There were yet other commercial groups, but they were not directly involved in external trade.
They operated within India, carrying goods from one place to another, banking money, transferring funds between cities, and financing traders.
When opportunities of investment in industries opened up, many of them set up factories.
As colonial control over Indian trade tightened, the space within which Indian merchants could function became increasingly limited.
They were barred from trading with Europe in manufactured goods, and had to export mostly raw materials and food grains – raw cotton, opium, wheat and indigo – required by the British.
They were also gradually edged out of the shipping business.
Till the First World War, European Managing Agencies in fact controlled a large sector of Indian industries.
Three of the biggest ones were Bird Heiglers & Co., Andrew Yule, and Jardine Skinner & Co.
These Agencies mobilised capital, set up joint-stock companies and managed them.
In most instances Indian financiers provided the capital while the European Agencies made all investment and business decisions.
The European merchant-industrialists had their own chambers of commerce which Indian businessmen were not allowed to join.
Where Did the Workers Come From?
Factories needed workers.
With the expansion of factories, this demand increased.
In 1901, there were 584,000 workers in Indian factories.
By 1946 the number was over 2,436, 000.
Where did the workers come from?
Over time, as news of employment spread, workers travelled great distances in the hope of work in the mills.
From the United Provinces, for instance, they went to work in the textile mills of Bombay and in the jute mills of Calcutta.
In most industrial regions workers came from the districts around.
Peasants and artisans who found no work in the village went to the industrial centres in search of work.
Over 50 per cent workers in the Bombay cotton industries in 1911 came from the neighbouring district of Ratnagiri, while the mills of Kanpur got most of their textile hands from the villages within the district of Kanpur.
Most often millworkers moved between the village and the city, returning to their village homes during harvests and festivals.
Getting jobs was always difficult, even when mills multiplied and the demand for workers increased.
The numbers seeking work were always more than the jobs available.
Entry into the mills was also restricted.
Industrialists usually employed a jobber to get new recruits.
Very often the jobber was an old and trusted worker.
He got people from his village, ensured them jobs, helped them settle in the city and provided them money in times of crisis.
The jobber therefore became a person with some authority and power.
He began demanding money and gifts for his favour and controlling the lives of workers.
The number of factory workers increased over time.
However, as you will see, they were a small proportion of the total industrial workforce.
The Peculiarities of Industrial Growth
European Managing Agencies, which dominated industrial production in India, were interested in certain kinds of products.
They established tea and coffee plantations, acquiring land at cheap rates from the colonial government; and they invested in mining, indigo and jute.
Most of these were products required primarily for export trade and not for sale in India.
By the first decade of the twentieth century a series of changes affected the pattern of industrialisation.
As the swadeshi movement gathered momentum, nationalists mobilised people to boycott foreign cloth.
Industrial groups organised themselves to protect their collective interests, pressurising the government to increase tariff protection and grant other concessions.
From 1906, moreover, the export of Indian yarn to China declined since produce from Chinese and Japanese mills flooded the Chinese market.
So industrialists in India began shifting from yarn to cloth production.
Cotton piece- goods production in India doubled between 1900 and 1912.
When Indian businessmen began setting up industries in the late nineteenth century, they avoided competing with Manchester goods in the Indian market.
Since yarn was not an important part of British imports into India, the early cotton mills in India produced coarse cotton yarn (thread) rather than fabric.
When yarn was imported it was only of the superior variety.
The yarn produced in Indian spinning mills was used by handloom weavers in India or exported to China.
Yet, till the First World War, industrial growth was slow.
The war created a dramatically new situation.
With British mills busy with war production to meet the needs of the army, Manchester imports into India declined.
Suddenly, Indian mills had a vast home market to supply.
As the war prolonged, Indian factories were called upon to supply war needs: jute bags, cloth for army uniforms, tents and leather boots, horse and mule saddles and a host of other items.
New factories were set up and old  ones ran multiple shifts.
Many new workers were employed and everyone was made to work longer hours.
Over the war years industrial production boomed.
After the war, Manchester could never recapture its old position in the Indian market.
Unable to modernise and compete with the US, Germany and Japan, the economy of Britain crumbled after the war.
Cotton production collapsed and exports of cotton cloth from Britain fell dramatically.
Within the colonies, local industrialists gradually consolidated their position, substituting foreign manufactures and capturing the home market.
Small-scale Industries Predominate
While factory industries grew steadily after the war, large industries formed only a small segment of the economy.
Most of them – about 67 per cent in 1911 – were located in Bengal and Bombay.
Over the rest of the country, small-scale production continued to predominate.
Only a small proportion of the total industrial labour force worked in registered factories: 5 per cent in 1911 and 10 per cent in 1931.
The rest worked in small workshops and household units, often located in alleys and bylanes, invisible to the passer-by.
In fact, in some instances, handicrafts production actually expanded in the twentieth century.
This is true even in the case of the handloom sector that we have discussed.
While cheap machine-made thread wiped out the spinning industry in the nineteenth century, the weavers survived, despite problems.
In the twentieth century, handloom cloth production expanded steadily: almost trebling between 1900 and 1940.
How did this happen?
Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others to survive the competition with mill industries.
Amongst weavers some produced coarse cloth while others wove finer varieties.
The coarser cloth was bought by the poor and its demand fluctuated violently.
In times of bad harvests and famines, when the rural poor had little to eat, and their cash income disappeared, they could not possibly buy cloth.
The demand for the finer varieties bought by the well-to-do was more stable.
The rich could buy these even when the poor starved.
Famines did not affect the sale of Banarasi or Baluchari saris.
Moreover, as you have seen, mills could not imitate specialised weaves.
Saris with woven borders, or the famous lungis and handkerchiefs of Madras, could not be easily displaced by mill production.
Weavers and other craftspeople who continued to expand production through the twentieth century, did not necessarily prosper.
They lived hard lives and worked long hours.
Very often the entire household – including all the women and children – had to work at various stages of the production process.
But they were not simply remnants of past times in the age of factories.
Their life and labour was integral to the process of industrialisation.
Market for Goods
We have seen how British manufacturers attempted to take over the Indian market, and how Indian weavers and craftsmen, traders and industrialists resisted colonial controls, demanded tariff protection, created their own spaces, and tried to extend the market for their produce.
But when new products are produced people have to be persuaded to buy them.
They have to feel like using the product.
How was this done?
One way in which new consumers are created is through advertisements.
As you know, advertisements make products appear desirable and necessary.
They try to shape the minds of people and create new needs.
Today we live in a world where advertisements surround us.
They appear in newspapers, magazines, hoardings, street walls, television screens.
But if we look back into history we find that from the very beginning of the industrial age, advertisements have played a part in expanding the markets for products, and in shaping a new consumer culture.
When Manchester industrialists began selling cloth in India, they put labels on the cloth bundles.
The label was needed to make the place of manufacture and the name of the company familiar to the buyer.
The label was also to be a mark of quality.
When buyers saw ‘MADE IN MANCHESTER’ written in bold on the label, they were expected to feel confident about buying the cloth.
But labels did not only carry words and texts.
They also carried images and were very often beautifully illustrated.
If we look at these old labels, we can have some idea of the mind of the manufacturers, their calculations, and the way they appealed to the people.
Images of Indian gods and goddesses regularly appeared on these labels.
It was as if the association with gods gave divine approval to the goods being sold.
The imprinted image of Krishna or Saraswati was also intended to make the manufacture from a foreign land appear somewhat familiar to Indian people.
By the late nineteenth century, manufacturers were printing calendars to popularise their products.
Unlike newspapers and magazines, calendars were used even by people who could not read.
They were hung in tea shops and in poor people’s homes just as much as in offices and middle-class apartments.
And those who hung the calendars had to see the advertisements, day after day, through the year.
In these calendars, once again, we see the figures of gods being used to sell new products.
Like the images of gods, figures of important personages, of emperors and nawabs, adorned advertisement and calendars.
The message very often seemed to say: if you respect the royal figure, then respect this product; when the product was being used by kings, or produced under royal command, its quality could not be questioned.
When Indian manufacturers advertised the nationalist message was clear and loud.
If you care for the nation then buy products that Indians produce.
Advertisements became a vehicle of the nationalist message of swadeshi.
Conclusion Clearly, the age of industries has meant major technological changes, growth of factories, and the making of a new industrial labour force.
However, as you have seen, hand technology and small-scale production remained an important part of the industrial landscape.
Cities in the Contemporary World In 1880, Durgacharan Ray wrote a novel, Debganer Martye Aagaman (The Gods Visit Earth), in which Brahma, the Creator in Hindu mythology, took a train to Calcutta with some other gods.
As Varuna, the Rain God, conducted them around the capital of British India, the gods were wonderstruck by the big, modern city – the train itself, the large ships on the river Ganges, factories belching smoke, bridges and monuments and a dazzling array of shops selling a wide range of commodities.
The gods were so impressed by the marvels of the teeming metropolis that they decided to build a Museum and a High Court in Heaven!
The city of Calcutta in the nineteenth century was brimming with opportunities – for trade and commerce, education and jobs.
But the gods were disturbed by another aspect of city life – its cheats and thieves, its grinding poverty, and the poor quality of housing for many.
Brahma himself got tricked into buying a pair of cheap glasses and when he tried to buy a pair of shoes, he was greatly confused by the shopkeepers who accused one another of being swindlers.
The gods were also perturbed at the confusion of caste, religious and gender identities in the city.
All social distinctions that appeared to be natural and normal seemed to be breaking down.
Like Durgacharan Ray, many others in nineteenth-century India were both amazed and confused by what they saw in the cities.
The city seemed to offer a series of contrasting images and experiences – wealth and poverty, splendour and dirt, opportunities and disappointments.
Were cities always like the one described above?
Though urbanisation has a long history, the modern city worldwide has developed only over the last 200 years.
Three historical processes have shaped modern cities in decisive ways: the rise of industrial capitalism, the establishment of colonial rule over large parts of the world, and the development of democratic ideals.
This chapter will trace some of the processes of this urbanisation.
It will explore how the modern city emerges, and what happens within the city.
Characteristics of the City
To begin with, how do we distinguish between cities on the one hand and towns and villages on the other?
Towns and cities that first appeared along river valleys, such as Ur, Nippur and Mohenjodaro, were larger in scale than other human settlements.
Ancient cities could develop only when an increase in food supplies made it possible to support a wide range of non-food producers.
Cites were often the centres of political power, administrative network, trade and industry, religious institutions, and intellectual activity, and supported various social groups such as artisans, merchants and priests.
Cities themselves can vary greatly in size and complexity.
They can be densely settled modern-day metropolises, which combine political and economic functions for an entire region, and support very large populations.
Or they can be smaller urban centres with limited functions.
This chapter will discuss the history of urbanisation in the modern world.
We will look in some detail at two modern cities, as examples of metropolitan development.
The first is London, the largest city in the world, and an imperial centre in the nineteenth century, and the second is Bombay, one of the most important modern cities in the Indian subcontinent.
Industrialisation and the Rise of the Modern City in England
Industrialisation changed the form of urbanisation in the modern period.
However, even as late as the 1850s, many decades after the beginning of the industrial revolution, most Western countries were largely rural.
The early industrial cities of Britain such as Leeds and Manchester attracted large numbers of migrants to the textile mills set up in the late eighteenth century.
In 1851, more than three-quarters of the adults living in Manchester were migrants from rural areas.
Now let us look at London.
By 1750, one out of every nine people of England and Wales lived in London.
It was a colossal city with a population of about 675,000.
Over the nineteenth century, London continued to expand.
Its population multiplied fourfold in the 70 years between 1810 and 1880, increasing from 1 million to about 4 million.
The city of London was a powerful magnet for migrant populations, even though it did not have large factories.
‘Nineteenth century London,’ says the historian Gareth Stedman Jones, ‘was a city of clerks and shopkeepers, of small masters and skilled artisans, of a growing number of semi skilled and sweated outworkers, of soldiers and servants, of casual labourers, street sellers, and beggars.’ Apart from the London dockyards, five major types of industries employed large numbers: clothing and footwear, wood and furniture, metals and engineering, printing and stationery, and precision products such as surgical instruments, watches, and objects of precious metal.
During the First World War (1914-18) London began manufacturing motor cars and electrical goods, and the number of large factories increased until they accounted for nearly one-third of all jobs in the city.
Marginal Groups
As London grew, crime flourished.
We are told that 20,000 criminals were living in London in the 1870s.
We know a great deal about criminal activities in this period, for crime became an object of widespread concern.
The police were worried about law and order, philanthropists were anxious about public morality, and industrialists wanted a hard-working and orderly labour force.
So the population of criminals was counted, their activities were watched, and their ways of life were investigated.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Henry Mayhew wrote several volumes on the London labour, and compiled long lists of those who made a living from crime.
Many of whom he listed as ‘criminals’ were in fact poor people who lived by stealing lead from roofs, food from shops, lumps of coal, and clothes drying on hedges.
There were others who were more skilled at their trade, expert at their jobs.
They were the cheats and tricksters, pickpockets and petty thieves crowding the streets of London.
In an attempt to discipline the population, the authorities imposed high penalties for crime and offered work to those who were considered the ‘deserving poor’.
Factories employed large numbers of women in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
With technological developments, women gradually lost their industrial jobs, and were forced to work within households.
The 1861 census recorded a quarter of a million domestic servants in London, of whom the vast majority were women, many of them recent migrants.
A large number of women used their homes to increase family income by taking in lodgers or through such activities as tailoring, washing or matchbox making.
However, there was a change once again in the twentieth century.
As women got employment in wartime industries and offices, they withdrew from domestic service.
Large number of children were pushed into low-paid work, often by their parents.
Andrew Mearns, a clergyman who wrote The Bitter Cry of Outcast London in the 1880s, showed why crime was more profitable than labouring in small underpaid factories: ‘A child seven years old is easily known to make 10 shillings 6 pence a week from thieving ... Before he can gain as much as the young thief [a boy] must make 56 gross of matchboxes a week, or 1,296 a day.’ It was only after the passage of the Compulsory Elementary Education Act in 1870, and the factory acts beginning from 1902, that children were kept out of industrial work.
Housing
Older cities like London changed dramatically when people began pouring in after the Industrial Revolution.
Factory or workshop owners did not house the migrant workers.
Instead, individual landowners put up cheap, and usually unsafe, tenements for the new arrivals.
Although poverty was not unknown in the countryside, it was more concentrated and starkly visible in the city.
In 1887, Charles Booth, a Liverpool shipowner, conducted the first social survey of low- skilled London workers in the East End of London.
He found that as many as 1 million Londoners (about one-fifth of the population of London at the time) were very poor and were expected to live only up to an average age of 29 (compared to the average life expectancy of 55 among the gentry and the middle class).
These people were more than likely to die in a ‘workhouse, hospital or lunatic asylum’.
London, he concluded ‘needed the rebuilding of at least 400,000 rooms to house its poorest citizens’.
For a while the better-off city dwellers continued to demand that slums simply be cleared away.
But gradually a larger and larger number of people began to recognise the need for housing for the poor.
What were the reasons for this increasing concern?
First, the vast mass of one-room houses occupied by the poor were seen as a serious threat to public health: they were overcrowded, badly ventilated, and lacked sanitation.
Second, there were worries about fire hazards created by poor housing.
Third, there was a widespread fear of social disorder, especially after the Russian Revolution in 1917.
Workers’ mass housing schemes were planned to prevent the London poor from turning rebellious.
Cleaning London
A variety of steps were taken to clean up London.
Attempts were made to decongest localities, green the open spaces, reduce pollution and landscape the city.
Large blocks of apartments were built, akin to those in Berlin and New York – cities which had similar housing problems.
Rent control was introduced in Britain during the First World War to ease the impact of a severe housing shortage.
The congestion in the nineteenth-century industrial city also led to a yearning for clean country air.
Many wealthy residents of London were able to afford a holiday home in the countryside.
Demands were made for new ‘lungs’ for the city, and some attempts were made to bridge the difference between city and countryside through such ideas as the Green Belt around London.
Architect and planner Ebenezer Howard developed the principle of the Garden City, a pleasant space full of plants and trees, where people would both live and work.
He believed this would also produce better-quality citizens.
Following Howard’s ideas Raymond Unwin and Barry Parker designed the garden city of New Earswick.
There were common garden spaces, beautiful views, and great attention to detail.
In the end, only well-off workers could afford these houses.
Between the two World Wars (1919-39) the responsibility for housing the working classes was accepted by the British state, and a million houses, most of them single-family cottages, were built by local authorities.
Meanwhile, the city had extended beyond the range where people could walk to work, and the development of suburbs made new forms of mass transport absolutely necessary.
Transport in the City
How could people be persuaded to leave the city and live in garden suburbs unless there were some means of travelling to the city for work?
The London underground railway partially solved the housing crisis by carrying large masses of people to and from the city.
The very first section of the Underground in the world opened on 10 January 1863 between Paddington and Farrington Street in London.
On that day 10,000 passengers were carried, with trains running every ten minutes.
By 1880 the expanded train service was carrying 40 million passengers a year.
At first people were afraid to travel underground.
This is what one newspaper reader warned: The compartment in which I sat was filled with passengers who were smoking pipes.
The atmosphere was a mixture of sulphur, coal dust and foul fumes from the gas lamps above, so that by the time we reached Moorgate, I was near dead of asphyxiation and heat.
I should think these underground railways must soon be discontinued for they are a menace to health.
Many felt that the ‘iron monsters’ added to the mess and unhealthiness of the city.
Charles Dickens wrote in Dombey and Son (1848) about the massive destruction in the process of construction:
Houses were knocked down; streets broken through and stopped; deep pits and trenches dug in the ground; enormous heaps of earth and clay thrown up; ... there were a hundred thousand shapes and substances of incompleteness, wildly mingled out their places, upside down, burrowing in the earth .
.
.
To make approximately two miles of railway, 900 houses had to be destroyed.
Thus the London tube railway led to a massive displacement of the London poor, especially between the two World Wars.
Yet the Underground eventually became a huge success.
By the twentieth century, most large metropolises such as New York, Tokyo and Chicago could not do without their well-functioning transit systems.
As a result, the population in the city became more dispersed.
Better-planned suburbs and a good railway network enabled large numbers to live outside central London and travel to work.
These new conveniences wore down social distinctions and also created new ones.
How did these changes affect domestic and public life?
Did they have the same significance for all social groups?
Social Change in the City
In the eighteenth century, the family had been a unit of production and consumption as well as of political decision-making.
The function and the shape of the family were completely transformed by life in the industrial city.
Ties between members of households loosened, and among the working class the institution of marriage tended to break down.
Women of the upper and middle classes in Britain, on the other hand, faced increasingly higher levels of isolation, although their lives were made easier by domestic maids who cooked, cleaned and cared for young children on low wages.
Women who worked for wages had some control over their lives, particularly among the lower social classes.
However, many social reformers felt that the family as an institution had broken down, and needed to be saved or reconstructed by pushing these women back into the home.
Men, Women and Family in the City
The city no doubt encouraged a new spirit of individualism among both men and women, and a freedom from the collective values that were a feature of the smaller rural communities.
But men and women did not have equal access to this new urban space.
As women lost their industrial jobs and conservative people railed against their presence in public spaces, women were forced to withdraw into their homes.
The public space became increasingly a male preserve, and the domestic sphere was seen as the proper place for women.
Most political movements of the nineteenth century, such as Chartism (a movement demanding the vote for all adult males) and the 10-hour movement (limiting hours of work in factories), mobilised large numbers of men.
Only gradually did women come to participate in political movements for suffrage that demanded the right to vote for women, or for married women’s rights to property (from the 1870s).
By the twentieth century, the urban family had been transformed yet again, partly by the experience of the valuable wartime work done by women, who were employed in large numbers to meet war demands.
The family now consisted of much smaller units.
Above all, the family became the heart of a new market – of goods and services, and of ideas.
If the new industrial city provided opportunities for mass work, it also raised the problem of mass leisure on Sundays and other common holidays.
How did people organise their new-found leisure time?
Leisure and Consumption
For wealthy Britishers, there had long been an annual ‘London Season’.
Several cultural events, such as the opera, the theatre and classical music performances were organised for an elite group of 300-400 families in the late eighteenth century.
Meanwhile, working classes met in pubs to have a drink, exchange news and sometimes also to organise for political action.
Many new types of large-scale entertainment for the common people came into being, some made possible with money from the state.
Libraries, art galleries and museums were established in the nineteenth century to provide people with a sense of history and pride in the achievements of the British.
At first, visitors to the British Museum in London numbered just about 15,000 every year, but when entry was made free in 1810, visitors swamped the museum: their number jumped to 127,643 in 1824-25, shooting up to 825, 901 by 1846.
Music halls were popular among the lower classes, and, by the early twentieth century, cinema became the great mass entertainment for mixed audiences.
British industrial workers were increasingly encouraged to spend their holidays by the sea, so as to derive the benefits of the sun and bracing winds.
Over 1 million British people went to the seaside at Blackpool in 1883; by 1939 their numbers had gone up to 7 million.
Politics in the City
In the severe winter of 1886, when outdoor work came to a standstill, the London poor exploded in a riot, demanding relief from the terrible conditions of poverty.
Alarmed shopkeepers closed down their establishments, fearing the 10,000-strong crowd that was marching from Deptford to London.
The marchers had to be dispersed by the police.
A similar riot occurred in late 1887; this time, it was brutally suppressed by the police in what came to be known as the Bloody Sunday of November 1887.
Two years later, thousands of London’s dockworkers went on strike and marched through the city.
According to one writer, ‘thousands of the strikers had marched through the city without a pocket being picked or a window being broken ...’ The 12-day strike was called to gain recognition for the dockworkers’ union.
From these examples you can see that large masses of people could be drawn into political causes in the city.
A large city population was thus both a threat and an opportunity.
State authorities went to great lengths to reduce the possibility of rebellion and enhance urban aesthetics, as the example of Paris shows.
The City in Colonial India
In sharp contrast to Western Europe in the same period, Indian cities did not mushroom in the nineteenth century.
The pace of urbanisation in India was slow under colonial rule.
In the early twentieth century, no more than 11 per cent of Indians were living in cities.
A large proportion of these urban dwellers were residents of the three Presidency cities.
These were multi-functional cities: they had major ports, warehouses, homes and offices, army camps, as well as educational institutions, museums and libraries.
Bombay was the premier city of India.
It expanded rapidly from the late nineteenth century, its population going up from 644,405 in 1872 to nearly 1,500,000 in 1941.
Bombay: The Prime City of India?
In the seventeenth century, Bombay was a group of seven islands under Portuguese control.
In 1661, control of the islands passed into British hands after the marriage of Britain’s King Charles II to the Portuguese princess.
The East India Company quickly shifted its base from Surat, its principal western port, to Bombay.
At first, Bombay was the major outlet for cotton textiles from Gujarat.
Later, in the nineteenth century, the city functioned as a port through which large quantities of raw materials such as cotton and opium would pass.
Gradually, it also became an important administrative centre in western India, and then, by the end of the nineteenth century, a major industrial centre.
Work in the City
Bombay became the capital of the Bombay Presidency in 1819, after the Maratha defeat in the Anglo-Maratha war.
The city quickly expanded.
With the growth of trade in cotton and opium, large communities of traders and bankers as well as artisans and shopkeepers came to settle in Bombay.
The establishment of textile mills led to a fresh surge in migration.
The first cotton textile mill in Bombay was established in 1854.
By 1921, there were 85 cotton mills with about 146,000 workers.
Only about one-fourth of Bombay’s inhabitants between 1881 and 1931 were born in Bombay: the rest came from outside.
Large numbers flowed in from the nearby district of Ratnagiri to work in the Bombay mills.
Women formed as much as 23 per cent of the mill workforce in the period between 1919 and 1926.
After that, their numbers dropped steadily to less than 10 per cent of the total workforce.
By the late 1930s, women’s jobs were increasingly taken over by machines or by men.
Bombay dominated the maritime trade of India till well into the twentieth century.
It was also at the junction head of two major railways.
The railways encouraged an even higher scale of migration into the city.
For instance, famine in the dry regions of Kutch drove large numbers of people into Bombay in 1888-89.
The flood of migrants in some years created panic and alarm in official circles.
Worried by the influx of population during the plague epidemic of 1898, district authorities sent about 30,000 people back to their places of origin by 1901.
Housing and Neighbourhoods
Bombay was a crowded city.
While every Londoner in the 1840s enjoyed an average space of 155 square yards, Bombay had a mere 9.5 square yards.
By 1872, when London had an average of 8 persons per house, the density in Bombay was as high as 20.
From its earliest days, Bombay did not grow according to any plan, and houses, especially in the Fort area, were interspersed with gardens.
The Bombay Fort area which formed the heart of the city in the early 1800s was divided between a ‘native’ town, where most of the Indians lived, and a European or ‘white’ section.
A European suburb and an industrial zone began to develop to the north of the Fort settlement area, with a similar suburb and cantonment in the south.
This racial pattern was true of all three Presidency cities.
With the rapid and unplanned expansion of the city, the crisis of housing and water supply became acute by the mid-1850s.
The arrival of the textile mills only increased the pressure on Bombay’s housing.
Like the European elite, the richer Parsi, Muslim and upper- caste traders and industrialists of Bombay lived in sprawling, spacious bungalows.
In contrast, more than 70 per cent of the working people lived in the thickly populated chawls of Bombay.
Since workers walked to their place of work, 90 per cent of millworkers were housed in Girangaon, a ‘mill village’ not more than 15 minutes’ walk from the mills.
Chawls were multi-storeyed structures which had been built from at least the 1860s in the ‘native’ parts of the town.
Like the tenements in London, these houses were largely owned by private landlords, such as merchants, bankers, and building contractors, looking for quick ways of earning money from anxious migrants.
Each chawl was divided into smaller one-room tenements which had no private toilets.
Many families could reside at a time in a tenement.
The Census of 1901 reported that ‘the mass of the island’s population or 80 per cent of the total, resides in tenements of one room; the average number of occupants lies between 4 and 5 ...’ High rents forced workers to share homes, either with relatives or caste fellows who were streaming into the city.
People had to keep the windows of their rooms closed even in humid weather due to the ‘close proximity of filthy gutters, privies, buffalo stables etc.’ Yet, though water was scarce, and people often quarrelled every morning for a turn at the tap, observers found that houses were kept quite clean.
The homes being small, streets and neighbourhoods were used for a variety of activities such as cooking, washing and sleeping.
Liquor shops and akharas came up in any empty spot.
Streets were also used for different types of leisure activities.
Parvathibai Bhor recalled her childhood years in the early twentieth century this way: ‘There was an open space in the middle of our four chawls.
There the magicians, monkey players or acrobats used to regularly perform their acts.
The Nandi bull used to come.
I used to be especially afraid of the Kadaklakshmi.
To see that they had to beat themselves on their naked bodies in order to fill their stomachs frightened me.’ Finally, chawls were also the place for the exchange of news about jobs, strikes, riots or demonstrations.
Caste and family groups in the mill neighbourhoods were headed by someone who was similar to a village headman.
Sometimes, the jobber in the mills could be the local neighbourhood leader.
He settled disputes, organised food supplies, or arranged informal credit.
He also brought important information on political developments.
People who belonged to the ‘depressed classes’ found it even more difficult to find housing.
Lower castes were kept out of many chawls and often had to live in shelters made of corrugated sheets, leaves, or bamboo poles.
If town planning in London emerged from fears of social revolution, planning in Bombay came about as a result of fears about the plague epidemic.
The City of Bombay Improvement Trust was established in 1898; it focused on clearing poorer homes out of the city centre.
By 1918, Trust schemes had deprived 64,000 people of their homes, but only 14,000 were rehoused.
In 1918, a Rent Act was passed to keep rents reasonable, but it had the opposite effect of producing a severe housing crisis, since landlords withdrew houses from the market.
Expansion of the city has always posed a problem in Bombay because of a scarcity of land.
One of the ways the city of Bombay has developed is through massive reclamation projects.
Land Reclamation in Bombay
Did you know that the seven islands of Bombay were joined into one landmass only over a period of time?
The earliest project began in 1784.
The Bombay governor William Hornby approved the building of the great sea wall which prevented the flooding of the low-lying areas of Bombay.
Since then, there have been several reclamation projects.
The need for additional commercial space in the mid-nineteenth century led to the formulation of several plans, both by government and private companies, for the reclamation of more land from the sea.
Private companies became more interested in taking financial risks.
In 1864, the Back Bay Reclamation Company won the right to reclaim the western foreshore from the tip of Malabar Hill to the end of Colaba.
Reclamation often meant the levelling of the hills around Bombay.
By the 1870s, although most of the private companies closed down due to the mounting cost, the city had expanded to about 22 square miles.
As the population continued to increase rapidly in the early twentieth century, every bit of the available area was built over and new areas were reclaimed from the sea.
A successful reclamation project was undertaken by the Bombay Port Trust, which built a dry dock between 1914 and 1918 and used the excavated earth to create the 22-acre Ballard Estate.
Subsequently, the famous Marine Drive of Bombay was developed.
Bombay as the City of Dreams: The World of Cinema and Culture
Who does not associate Bombay with its film industry?
Despite its massive overcrowding and difficult living conditions, Bombay appears to many as a ‘mayapuri’ – a city of dreams.
Many Bombay films deal with the arrival in the city of new migrants, and their encounters with the real pressures of daily life.
Some popular songs from the Bombay film industry speak of the contradictory aspects of the city.
In the film CID (1956) the hero’s buddy sings, ‘Ai dil hai mushkil jeena yahan; zara hatke zara bachke, ye hai Bambai meri jaan’ (My heart, it is difficult to live here!
move over a little, take care of yourself!
this is Bombay!
my love).
A slightly more disillusioned voice sings in Guest House (1959): ‘Jiska juta usika sar, dil hai chhote bada shahar, are vah re vah teri Bambai’ (Bombay, you city what a place!
Here one gets beaten with one’s own shoes!
The city is big but people’s hearts are small!
).
When did the Bombay film industry make its first appearance?
Harishchandra Sakharam Bhatwadekar shot a scene of a wrestling match in Bombay’s Hanging Gardens and it became India’s first movie in 1896.
Soon after, Dadasaheb Phalke made Raja Harishchandra (1913).
After that, there was no turning back.
By 1925, Bombay had become India’s film capital, producing films for a national audience.
The amount of money invested in about 50 Indian films in 1947 was Rs 756 million.
By 1987, the film industry employed 520,000 people.
Most of the people in the film industry were themselves migrants who came from cities like Lahore, Calcutta, Madras and contributed to the national character of the industry.
Those who came from Lahore, then in Punjab, were especially important for the development of the Hindi film industry.
Many famous writers, like Ismat Chughtai and Saadat Hasan Manto, were associated with Hindi cinema.
Bombay films have contributed in a big way to produce an image of the city as a blend of dream and reality, of slums and star bungalows.
Cities and the Challenge of the Environment
City development everywhere occurred at the expense of ecology and the environment.
Natural features were flattened out or transformed in response to the growing demand for space for factories, housing and other institutions.
Large quantities of refuse and waste products polluted air and water, while excessive noise became a feature of urban life.
The widespread use of coal in homes and industries in nineteenth- century England raised serious problems.
In industrial cities such as Leeds, Bradford and Manchester, hundreds of factory chimneys spewed black smoke into the skies.
People joked that most inhabitants of these cities grew up believing that the skies were grey and all vegetation was black!
Shopkeepers, homeowners and others complained about the black fog that descended on their towns, causing bad tempers, smoke-related illnesses, and dirty clothes.
When people first joined campaigns for cleaner air, the goal was to control the nuisance through legislation.
This was not at all easy, since factory owners and steam engine owners did not want to spend on technologies that would improve their machines.
By the 1840s, a few towns such as Derby, Leeds and Manchester had laws to control smoke in the city.
But smoke was not easy to monitor or measure, and owners got away with small adjustments to their machinery that did nothing to stop the smoke.
Moreover, the Smoke Abatement Acts of 1847 and 1853, as they were called, did not always work to clear the air.
Calcutta too had a long history of air pollution.
Its inhabitants inhaled grey smoke, particularly in the winter.
Since the city was built on marshy land, the resulting fog combined with smoke to generate thick black smog.
High levels of pollution were a consequence of the huge population that depended on dung and wood as fuel in their daily life.
But the main polluters were the industries and establishments that used steam engines run on coal.
Colonial authorities were at first intent on clearing the place of miasmas, or harmful vapours, but the railway line introduced in 1855 brought a dangerous new pollutant into the picture – coal from Raniganj.
The high content of ash in Indian coal was a problem.
Many pleas were made to banish the dirty mills from the city, with no effect.
However, in 1863, Calcutta became the first Indian city to get smoke nuisance legislation.
In 1920, the rice mills of Tollygunge began to burn rice husk instead of coal, leading residents to complain that ‘the air is filled up with black soot which falls like drizzling rain from morning till night, and it has become impossible to live’.
The inspectors of the Bengal Smoke Nuisance Commission finally managed to control industrial smoke.
Controlling domestic smoke, however, was far more difficult.
Conclusion Despite its problems, the city has always been attractive to those seeking freedom and opportunity.
Even the gods in Durgacharan’s novel, referred to at the beginning of this chapter, found heaven imperfect, compared with all that they had witnessed and experienced on their visit to Calcutta.
Yet all the aspects of city life that upset them were signs of the new routes to social and economic mobility that the city offered to the millions who had made it their home.
In the spring of 1945, a little eleven-year-old German boy called Helmuth was lying in bed when he overheard his parents discussing something in serious tones.
His father, a prominent physician, deliberated with his wife whether the time had come to kill the entire family, or if he should commit suicide alone.
His father spoke about his fear of revenge, saying, ‘Now the Allies will do to us what we did to the crippled and Jews.’ The next day, he took Helmuth to the woods, where they spent their last happy time together, singing old children’s songs.
Later, Helmuth’s father shot himself in his office.
Helmuth remembers that he saw his father’s bloody uniform being burnt in the family fireplace.
So traumatised was he by what he had overheard and what had happened, that he reacted by refusing to eat at home for the following nine years!
He was afraid that his mother might poison him.
Although Helmuth may not have realised all that it meant, his father had been a Nazi and a supporter of Adolf Hitler.
Many of you will know something about the Nazis and Hitler.
You probably know of Hitler’s determination to make Germany into a mighty power and his ambition of conquering all of Europe.
You may have heard that he killed Jews.
But Nazism was not one or two isolated acts.
It was a system, a structure of ideas about the world and politics.
Let us try and understand what Nazism was all about.
Let us see why Helmuth’s father killed himself and what the basis of his fear was.
In May 1945, Germany surrendered to the Allies.
Anticipating what was coming, Hitler, his propaganda minister Goebbels and his entire family committed suicide collectively in his Berlin bunker in April.
At the end of the war, an International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg was set up to prosecute Nazi war criminals for Crimes against Peace, for War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity.
Germany’s conduct during the war, especially those actions which came to be called Crimes Against Humanity, raised serious moral and ethical questions and invited worldwide condemnation.
What were these acts?
Under the shadow of the Second World War, Germany had waged a genocidal war, which resulted in the mass murder of selected groups of innocent civilians of Europe.
The number of people killed included 6 million Jews, 200,000 Gypsies, 1 million Polish civilians, 70,000 Germans who were considered mentally and physically disabled, besides innumerable political opponents.
Nazis devised an unprecedented means of killing people, that is, by gassing them in various killing centres like Auschwitz.
The Nuremberg Tribunal sentenced only eleven leading Nazis to death.
Many others were imprisoned for life.
The retribution did come, yet the punishment of the Nazis was far short of the brutality and extent of their crimes.
The Allies did not want to be as harsh on defeated Germany as they had been after the First World War.
Everyone came to feel that the rise of Nazi Germany could be partly traced back to the German experience at the end of the First World War.
What was this experience?
Birth of the Weimar Republic
Germany, a powerful empire in the early years of the twentieth century, fought the First World War (1914-1918) alongside the Austrian empire and against the Allies (England, France and Russia.)
All joined the war enthusiastically hoping to gain from a quick victory.
Little did they realise that the war would stretch on, eventually draining Europe of all its resources.
Germany made initial gains by occupying France and Belgium.
However the Allies, strengthened by the US entry in 1917, won , defeating Germany and the Central Powers in November 1918.
The defeat of Imperial Germany and the abdication of the emperor gave an opportunity to parliamentary parties to recast German polity.
A National Assembly met at Weimar and established a democratic constitution with a federal structure.
Deputies were now elected to the German Parliament or Reichstag, on the basis of equal and universal votes cast by all adults including women.
This republic, however, was not received well by its own people largely because of the terms it was forced to accept after Germany’s defeat at the end of the First World War.
The peace treaty at Versailles with the Allies was a harsh and humiliating peace.
Germany lost its overseas colonies, a tenth of its population, 13 per cent of its territories, 75 per cent of its iron and 26 per cent of its coal to France, Poland, Denmark and Lithuania.
The Allied Powers demilitarised Germany to weaken its power.
The War Guilt Clause held Germany responsible for the war and damages the Allied countries suffered.
Germany was forced to pay compensation amounting to £6 billion.
The Allied armies also occupied the resource-rich Rhineland for much of the 1920s.
Many Germans held the new Weimar Republic responsible for not only the defeat in the war but the disgrace at Versailles.
The Effects of the War
The war had a devastating impact on the entire continent both psychologically and financially.
From a continent of creditors, Europe turned into one of debtors.
Unfortunately, the infant Weimar Republic was being made to pay for the sins of the old empire.
The republic carried the burden of war guilt and national humiliation and was financially crippled by being forced to pay compensation.
Those who supported the Weimar Republic, mainly Socialists, Catholics and Democrats, became easy targets of attack in the conservative nationalist circles.
They were mockingly called the ‘November criminals’.
This mindset had a major impact on the political developments of the early 1930s, as we will soon see.
The First World War left a deep imprint on European society and polity.
Soldiers came to be placed above civilians.
Politicians and publicists laid great stress on the need for men to be aggressive, strong and masculine.
The media glorified trench life.
The truth, however, was that soldiers lived miserable lives in these trenches, trapped with rats feeding on corpses.
They faced poisonous gas and enemy shelling, and witnessed their ranks reduce rapidly.
Aggressive war propaganda and national honour occupied centre stage in the public sphere, while popular support grew for conservative dictatorships that had recently come into being.
Democracy was indeed a young and fragile idea, which could not survive the instabilities of interwar Europe.
Political Radicalism and Economic Crises
The birth of the Weimar Republic coincided with the revolutionary uprising of the Spartacist League on the pattern of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia.
Soviets of workers and sailors were established in many cities.
The political atmosphere in Berlin was charged with demands for Soviet-style governance.
Those opposed to this – such as the socialists, Democrats and Catholics – met in Weimar to give shape to the democratic republic.
The Weimar Republic crushed the uprising with the help of a war veterans organisation called Free Corps.
The anguished Spartacists later founded the Communist Party of Germany.
Communists and Socialists henceforth became irreconcilable enemies and could not make common cause against Hitler.
Both revolutionaries and militant nationalists craved for radical solutions.
Political radicalisation was only heightened by the economic crisis of 1923.
Germany had fought the war largely on loans and had to pay war reparations in gold.
This depleted gold reserves at a time resources were scarce.
In 1923 Germany refused to pay, and the French occupied its leading industrial area, Ruhr, to claim their coal.
Germany retaliated with passive resistance and printed paper currency recklessly.
With too much printed money in circulation, the value of the German mark fell.
In April the US dollar was equal to 24,000 marks, in July 353,000 marks, in August 4,621,000 marks and at 98,860,000 marks by December, the figure had run into trillions.
As the value of the mark collapsed, prices of goods soared.
The image of Germans carrying cartloads of currency notes to buy a loaf of bread was widely publicised evoking worldwide sympathy.
This crisis came to be known as hyperinflation, a situation when prices rise phenomenally high.
Eventually, the Americans intervened and bailed Germany out of the crisis by introducing the Dawes Plan, which reworked the terms of reparation to ease the financial burden on Germans.
The Years of Depression
The years between 1924 and 1928 saw some stability.
Yet this was built on sand.
German investments and industrial recovery were totally dependent on short-term loans, largely from the USA.
This support was withdrawn when the Wall Street Exchange crashed in 1929.
Fearing a fall in prices, people made frantic efforts to sell their shares.
On one single day, 24 October, 13 million shares were sold.
This was the start of the Great Economic Depression.
Over the next three years, between 1929 and 1932, the national income of the USA fell by half.
Factories shut down, exports fell, farmers were badly hit and speculators withdrew their money from the market.
The effects of this recession in the US economy were felt worldwide.
The German economy was the worst hit by the economic crisis.
By 1932, industrial production was reduced to 40 per cent of the 1929 level.
Workers lost their jobs or were paid reduced wages.
The number of unemployed touched an unprecedented 6 million.
On the streets of Germany you could see men with placards around their necks saying, ‘Willing to do any work’.
Unemployed youths played cards or simply sat at street corners, or desperately queued up at the local employment exchange.
As jobs disappeared, the youth took to criminal activities and total despair became commonplace.
The economic crisis created deep anxieties and fears in people.
The middle classes, especially salaried employees and pensioners, saw their savings diminish when the currency lost its value.
Small businessmen, the self-employed and retailers suffered as their businesses got ruined.
These sections of society were filled with the fear of proletarianisation, an anxiety of being reduced to the ranks of the working class, or worse still, the unemployed.
Only organised workers could manage to keep their heads above water, but unemployment weakened their bargaining power.
Big business was in crisis.
The large mass of peasantry was affected by a sharp fall in agricultural prices and women, unable to fill their children’s stomachs, were filled with a sense of deep despair.
Politically too the Weimar Republic was fragile.
The Weimar constitution had some inherent defects, which made it unstable and vulnerable to dictatorship.
One was proportional representation.
This made achieving a majority by any one party a near impossible task, leading to a rule by coalitions.
Another defect was Article 48, which gave the President the powers to impose emergency, suspend civil rights and rule by decree.
Within its short life, the Weimar Republic saw twenty different cabinets lasting on an average 239 days, and a liberal use of Article 48.
Yet the crisis could not be managed.
People lost confidence in the democratic parliamentary system, which seemed to offer no solutions.
Hitler’s Rise to Power
This crisis in the economy, polity and society formed the background to Hitler’s rise to power.
Born in 1889 in Austria, Hitler spent his youth in poverty.
When the First World War broke out, he enrolled for the army, acted as a messenger in the front, became a corporal, and earned medals for bravery.
The German defeat horrified him and the Versailles Treaty made him furious.
In 1919, he joined a small group called the German Workers’ Party.
He subsequently took over the organisation and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers’ Party.
This party came to be known as the Nazi Party.
In 1923, Hitler planned to seize control of Bavaria, march to Berlin and capture power.
He failed, was arrested, tried for treason, and later released.
The Nazis could not effectively mobilise popular support till the early 1930s.
It was during the Great Depression that Nazism became a mass movement.
As we have seen, after 1929, banks collapsed and businesses shut down, workers lost their jobs and the middle classes were threatened with destitution.
In such a situation Nazi propaganda stirred hopes of a better future.
In 1928, the Nazi Party got no more than 2.
6 per cent votes in the Reichstag – the German parliament.
By 1932, it had become the largest party with 37 per cent votes.
Hitler was a powerful speaker.
His passion and his words moved people.
He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustice of the Versailles Treaty and restore the dignity of the German people.
He promised employment for those looking for work, and a secure future for the youth.
He promised to weed out all foreign influences and resist all foreign ‘conspiracies’ against Germany.
Hitler devised a new style of politics.
He understood the significance of rituals and spectacle in mass mobilisation.
Nazis held massive rallies and public meetings to demonstrate the support for Hitler and instil a sense of unity among the people.
The Red banners with the Swastika, the Nazi salute, and the ritualised rounds of applause after the speeches were all part of this spectacle of power.
Nazi propaganda skilfully projected Hitler as a messiah, a saviour, as someone who had arrived to deliver people from their distress.
It is an image that captured the imagination of a people whose sense of dignity and pride had been shattered, and who were living in a time of acute economic and political crises.
The Destruction of Democracy
On 30 January 1933, President Hindenburg offered the Chancellorship, the highest position in the cabinet of ministers, to Hitler.
By now the Nazis had managed to rally the conservatives to their cause.
Having acquired power, Hitler set out to dismantle the structures of democratic rule.
A mysterious fire that broke out in the German Parliament building in February facilitated his move.
The Fire Decree of 28 February 1933 indefinitely suspended civic rights like freedom of speech, press and assembly that had been guaranteed by the Weimar constitution.
Then he turned on his arch- enemies, the Communists, most of whom were hurriedly packed off to the newly established concentration camps.
The repression of the Communists was severe.
Out of the surviving 6,808 arrest files of Duesseldorf, a small city of half a million population, 1,440 were those of Communists alone.
They were, however, only one among the 52 types of victims persecuted by the Nazis across the country.
On 3 March 1933, the famous Enabling Act was passed.
This Act established dictatorship in Germany.
It gave Hitler all powers to sideline Parliament and rule by decree.
All political parties and trade unions were banned except for the Nazi Party and its affiliates.
The state established complete control over the economy, media, army and judiciary.
Special surveillance and security forces were created to control and order society in ways that the Nazis wanted.
Apart from the already existing regular police in green uniform and the SA or the Storm Troopers, these included the Gestapo (secret state police), the SS (the protection squads), criminal police and the Security Service (SD).
It was the extra-constitutional powers of these newly organised forces that gave the Nazi state its reputation as the most dreaded criminal state.
People could now be detained in Gestapo torture chambers, rounded up and sent to concentration camps, deported at will or arrested without any legal procedures.
The police forces acquired powers to rule with impunity.
Reconstruction
Hitler assigned the responsibility of economic recovery to the economist Hjalmar Schacht who aimed at full production and full employment through a state-funded work-creation programme.
This project produced the famous German superhighways and the people’s car, the Volkswagen.
In foreign policy also Hitler acquired quick successes.
He pulled out of the League of Nations in 1933, reoccupied the Rhineland in 1936, and integrated Austria and Germany in 1938 under the slogan, One people, One empire, and One leader.
He then went on to wrest German- speaking Sudentenland from Czechoslovakia, and gobbled up the entire country.
In all of this he had the unspoken support of England, which had considered the Versailles verdict too harsh.
These quick successes at home and abroad seemed to reverse the destiny of the country.
Hitler did not stop here.
Schacht had advised Hitler against investing hugely in rearmament as the state still ran on deficit financing.
Cautious people, however, had no place in Nazi Germany.
Schacht had to leave.
Hitler chose war as the way out of the approaching economic crisis.
Resources were to be accumulated through expansion of territory.
In September 1939, Germany invaded Poland.
This started a war with France and England.
In September 1940, a Tripartite Pact was signed between Germany, Italy and Japan, strengthening Hitler’s claim to international power.
Puppet regimes, supportive of Nazi Germany, were installed in a large part of Europe.
By the end of 1940, Hitler was at the pinnacle of his power.
Hitler now moved to achieve his long-term aim of conquering Eastern Europe.
He wanted to ensure food supplies and living space for Germans.
He attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941.
In this historic blunder Hitler exposed the German western front to British aerial bombing and the eastern front to the powerful Soviet armies.
The Soviet Red Army inflicted a crushing and humiliating defeat on Germany at Stalingrad.
After this the Soviet Red Army hounded out the retreating German soldiers until they reached the heart of Berlin, establishing Soviet hegemony over the entire Eastern Europe for half a century thereafter.
Meanwhile, the USA had resisted involvement in the war.
It was unwilling to once again face all the economic problems that the First World War had caused.
But it could not stay out of the war for long.
Japan was expanding its power in the east.
It had occupied French Indo-China and was planning attacks on US naval bases in the Pacific.
When Japan extended its support to Hitler and bombed the US base at Pearl Harbor, the US entered the Second World War.
The war ended in May 1945 with Hitler’s defeat and the US dropping of the atom bomb on Hiroshima in Japan.
From this brief account of what happened in the Second World War, we now return to Helmuth and his father’s story, a story of Nazi criminality during the war.
The Nazi Worldview
The crimes that Nazis committed were linked to a system of belief and a set of practices.
Nazi ideology was synonymous with Hitler’s worldview.
According to this there was no equality between people, but only a racial hierarchy.
In this view blond, blue-eyed, Nordic German Aryans were at the top, while Jews were located at the lowest rung.
They came to be regarded as an anti-race, the arch-enemies of the Aryans.
All other coloured people were placed in between depending upon their external features.
Hitler’s racism borrowed from thinkers like Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer.
Darwin was a natural scientist who tried to explain the creation of plants and animals through the concept of evolution and natural selection.
Herbert Spencer later added the idea of survival of the fittest.
According to this idea, only those species survived on earth that could adapt themselves to changing climatic conditions.
We should bear in mind that Darwin never advocated human intervention in what he thought was a purely natural process of selection.
However, his ideas were used by racist thinkers and politicians to justify imperial rule over conquered peoples.
The Nazi argument was simple: the strongest race would survive and the weak ones would perish.
The Aryan race was the finest.
It had to retain its purity, become stronger and dominate the world.
The other aspect of Hitler’s ideology related to the geopolitical concept of Lebensraum, or living space.
He believed that new territories had to be acquired for settlement.
This would enhance the area of the mother country, while enabling the settlers on new lands to retain an intimate link with the place of their origin.
It would also enhance the material resources and power of the German nation.
Hitler intended to extend German boundaries by moving eastwards, to concentrate all Germans geographically in one place.
Poland became the laboratory for this experimentation.
Establishment of the Racial State
Once in power, the Nazis quickly began to implement their dream of creating an exclusive racial community of pure Germans by physically eliminating all those who were seen as ‘undesirable’ in the extended empire.
Nazis wanted only a society of ‘pure and healthy Nordic Aryans’.
They alone were considered ‘desirable’.
Only they were seen as worthy of prospering and multiplying against all others who were classed as ‘undesirable’.
This meant that even those Germans who were seen as impure or abnormal had no right to exist.
Under the Euthanasia Programme, Helmuth’s father along with other Nazi officials had condemned to death many Germans who were considered mentally or physically unfit.
Jews were not the only community classified as ‘undesirable’.
There were others.
Many Gypsies and blacks living in Nazi Germany were considered as racial ‘inferiors’ who threatened the biological purity of the ‘superior Aryan’ race.
They were widely persecuted.
Even Russians and Poles were considered subhuman, and hence undeserving of any humanity.
When Germany occupied Poland and parts of Russia, captured civilians were forced to work as slave labour.
Many of them died simply through hard work and starvation.
Jews remained the worst sufferers in Nazi Germany.
Nazi hatred of Jews had a precursor in the traditional Christian hostility towards Jews.
They had been stereotyped as killers of Christ and usurers.Until medieval times Jews were barred from owning land.
They survived mainly through trade and moneylending.
They lived in separately marked areas called ghettos.
They were often persecuted through periodic organised violence, and expulsion from the land.
However, Hitler’s hatred of Jews was based on pseudoscientific theories of race, which held that conversion was no solution to ‘the Jewish problem’.
It could be solved only through their total elimination.
From 1933 to 1938 the Nazis terrorised, pauperised and segregated the Jews, compelling them to leave the country.
The next phase, 1939-1945, aimed at concentrating them in certain areas and eventually killing them in gas chambers in Poland.
The Racial Utopia Under the shadow of war, the Nazis proceeded to realise their murderous, racial ideal.
Genocide and war became two sides of the same coin.
Occupied Poland was divided up.
Much of north-western Poland was annexed to Germany.
Poles were forced to leave their homes and properties behind to be occupied by ethnic Germans brought in from occupied Europe.
Poles were then herded like cattle in the other part called the General Government, the destination of all ‘undesirables’ of the empire.
Members of the Polish intelligentsia were murdered in large numbers in order to keep the entire people intellectually and spiritually servile.
Polish children who looked like Aryans were forcibly snatched from their mothers and examined by ‘race experts’.
If they passed the race tests they were raised in German families and if not, they were deposited in orphanages where most perished.
With some of the largest ghettos and gas chambers, the General Government also served as the killing fields for the Jews.
Youth in Nazi Germany
Hitler was fanatically interested in the youth of the country.
He felt that a strong Nazi society could be established only by teaching children Nazi ideology.
This required a control over the child both inside and outside school.
What happened in schools under Nazism?
All schools were ‘cleansed’ and ‘purified’.
This meant that teachers who were Jews or seen as ‘politically unreliable’ were dismissed.
Children were first segregated: Germans and Jews could not sit together or play together.
Subsequently, ‘undesirable children’ – Jews, the physically handicapped, Gypsies – were thrown out of schools.
And finally in the 1940s, they were taken to the gas chambers.
‘Good German’ children were subjected to a process of Nazi schooling, a prolonged period of ideological training.
School textbooks were rewritten.
Racial science was introduced to justify Nazi ideas of race.
Stereotypes about Jews were popularised even through maths classes.
Children were taught to be loyal and submissive, hate Jews, and worship Hitler.
Even the function of sports was to nurture a spirit of violence and aggression among children.
Hitler believed that boxing could make children iron hearted, strong and masculine.
Youth organisations were made responsible for educating German youth in the ‘the spirit of National Socialism’.
Ten-year-olds had to enter Jungvolk.
At 14, all boys had to join the Nazi youth organisation – Hitler Youth – where they learnt to worship war, glorify aggression and violence, condemn democracy, and hate Jews, communists, Gypsies and all those categorised as ‘undesirable’.
After a period of rigorous ideological and physical training they joined the Labour Service, usually at the age of 18.
Then they had to serve in the armed forces and enter one of the Nazi organisations.
The Youth League of the Nazis was founded in 1922.
Four years later it was renamed Hitler Youth.
To unify the youth movement under Nazi control, all other youth organisations were systematically dissolved and finally banned.
The Nazi Cult of Motherhood
Children in Nazi Germany were repeatedly told that women were radically different from men.
The fight for equal rights for men and women that had become part of democratic struggles everywhere was wrong and it would destroy society.
While boys were taught to be aggressive, masculine and steel hearted, girls were told that they had to become good mothers and rear pure-blooded Aryan children.
Girls had to maintain the purity of the race, distance 67themselves from Jews, look after the home, and teach their children Nazi values.
They had to be the bearers of the Aryan culture and race.
In 1933 Hitler said: ‘In my state the mother is the most important citizen.’ But in Nazi Germany all mothers were not treated equally.
Women who bore racially undesirable children were punished and those who produced racially desirable children were awarded.
They were given favoured treatment in hospitals and were also entitled to concessions in shops and on theatre tickets and railway fares.
To encourage women to produce many children, Honour Crosses were awarded.
A bronze cross was given for four children, silver for six and gold for eight or more.
All ‘Aryan’ women who deviated from the prescribed code of conduct were publicly condemned, and severely punished.
Those who maintained contact with Jews, Poles and Russians were paraded through the town with shaved heads, blackened faces and placards hanging around their necks announcing ‘I have sullied the honour of the nation’.
Many received jail sentences and lost civic honour as well as their husbands and families for this ‘criminal offence’.
The Art of Propaganda
The Nazi regime used language and media with care, and often to great effect.
The terms they coined to describe their various practices are not only deceptive.
They are chilling.
Nazis never used the words ‘kill’ or ‘murder’ in their official communications.
Mass killings were termed special treatment, final solution (for the Jews), euthanasia (for the disabled), selection and disinfections.
‘Evacuation’ meant deporting people to gas chambers.
Do you know what the gas chambers were called?
They were labelled ‘disinfection-areas’, and looked like bathrooms equipped with fake showerheads.
Media was carefully used to win support for the regime and popularise its worldview.
Nazi ideas were spread through visual images, films, radio, posters, catchy slogans and leaflets.
In posters, groups identified as the ‘enemies’ of Germans were stereotyped, mocked, abused and described as evil.
Socialists and liberals were represented as weak and degenerate.
They were attacked as malicious foreign agents.
Propaganda films were made to create hatred for Je ws.
The most infamous film was The Eternal Jew.
Orthodox Jews were stereotyped and marked.
They were shown with flowing beards wearing kaftans, whereas in reality it was difficult to distinguish German Jews by their outward appearance because they were a highly assimilated community.
They were referred to as vermin, rats and pests.
Their movements were compared to those of rodents.
Nazism worked on the minds of the people, tapped their emotions, and turned their hatred and anger at those marked as ‘undesirable’.
The Nazis made equal efforts to appeal to all the different sections of the population.
They sought to win their support by suggesting that Nazis alone could solve all their problems.
Ordinary People and the Crimes Against Humanity
How did the common people react to Nazism?
Many saw the world through Nazi eyes, and spoke their mind in Nazi language.
They felt hatred and anger surge inside them when they saw someone who looked like a Jew.
They marked the houses of Jews and reported suspicious neighbours.
They genuinely believed Nazism would bring prosperity and improve general well-being.
But not every German was a Nazi.
Many organised active resistance to Nazism, braving police repression and death.
The large majority of Germans, however, were passive onlookers and apathetic witnesses.
They were too scared to act, to differ, to protest.
They preferred to look away.
Pastor Niemoeller, a resistance fighter, observed an absence of protest, an uncanny silence, amongst ordinary Germans in the face of brutal and organised crimes committed against people in the Nazi empire.
What Jews felt in Nazi Germany is a different story altogether.
Charlotte Beradt secretly recorded people’s dreams in her diary and later published them in a highly disconcerting book called the Third Reich of Dreams.
She describes how Jews themselves began believing in the Nazi stereotypes about them.
They dreamt of their hooked noses, black hair and eyes, Jewish looks and body movements.
The stereotypical images publicised in the Nazi press haunted the Jews.
They troubled them even in their dreams.
Jews died many deaths even before they reached the gas chamber.
Knowledge about the Holocaust
Information about Nazi practices had trickled out of Germany during the last years of the regime.
But it was only after the war ended and Germany was defeated that the world came to realise the horrors of what had happened.
While the Germans were preoccupied with their own plight as a defeated nation emerging out of the rubble, the Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings they had endured during the Nazi killing operations – also called the Holocaust.
At its height, a ghetto inhabitant had said to another that he wanted to outlive the war just for half an hour.
Presumably he meant that he wanted to be able to tell the world about what had happened in Nazi Germany.
This indomitable spirit to bear witness and to preserve the documents can be seen in many ghetto and camp inhabitants who wrote diaries, kept notebooks, and created archives.
On the other hand when the war seemed lost, the Nazi leadership distributed petrol to its functionaries to destroy all incriminating evidence available in offices.
Yet the history and the memory of the Holocaust live on in memoirs, fiction, documentaries, poetry, memorials and museums in many parts of the world today.
These are a tribute to those who resisted it, an embarrassing reminder to those who collaborated, and a warning to those who watched in silence.
In 1848, Frédéric Sorrieu, a French artist, prepared a series of four prints visualising his dream of a world made up of ‘democratic and social Republics’, as he called them.
The first print (Fig.
1) of the series, shows the peoples of Europe and America – men and women of all ages and social classes – marching in a long train, and offering homage to the statue of Liberty as they pass by it.
As you would recall, artists of the time of the French Revolution personified Liberty as a female figure – here you can recognise the torch of Enlightenment she bears in one hand and the Charter of the Rights of Man in the other.
On the earth in the foreground of the image lie the shattered remains of the symbols of absolutist institutions.
In Sorrieu’s utopian vision, the peoples of the world are grouped as distinct nations, identified through their flags and national costume.
Leading the procession, way past the statue of Liberty, are the United States and Switzerland, which by this time were already nation-states.
France, identifiable by the revolutionary tricolour, has just reached the statue.
She is followed by the peoples of Germany, bearing the black, red and gold flag.
Interestingly, at the time when Sorrieu created this image, the German peoples did not yet exist as a united nation – the flag they carry is an expression of liberal hopes in 1848 to unify the numerous German-speaking principalities into a nation-state under a democratic constitution.
Following the German peoples are the peoples of Austria, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy, Poland, England, Ireland, Hungary and Russia.
From the heavens above, Christ, saints and angels gaze upon the scene.
They have been used by the artist to symbolise fraternity among the nations of endeavours, sacrifice and devotion.
A heroic past, the world.
This chapter will deal with many of the issues visualised by Sorrieu in Fig.
1.
During the nineteenth century, nationalism emerged as a force which brought about sweeping changes in the political and mental world of Europe.
The end result of these changes was the emergence of the nation-state in place of the multi-national dynastic empires of Europe.
The concept and practices of a modern state, in which a centralised power exercised sovereign control over a clearly defined territory, had been developing over a long period of time in Europe.
But a nation-state was one in which the majority of its citizens, and not only its rulers, came to develop a sense of common identity and shared history or descent.
This commonness did not exist from time immemorial; it was forged through struggles, through the actions of leaders and the common people.
This chapter will look at the diverse processes through which nation-states and nationalism came into being in nineteenth-century Europe.
The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation
The first clear expression of nationalism came with the French Revolution in 1789.
France, as you would remember, was a full-fledged territorial state in 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch.
The political and constitutional changes that came in the wake of the French Revolution led to the transfer of sovereignty from the monarchy to a body of French citizens.
The revolution proclaimed that it was the people who would henceforth constitute the nation and shape its destiny.
From the very beginning, the French revolutionaries introduced various measures and practices that could create a sense of collective identity amongst the French people.
The ideas of la patrie (the fatherland) and le citoyen (the citizen) emphasised the notion of a united community enjoying equal rights under a constitution.
A new French flag, the tricolour, was chosen to replace the former royal standard.
The Estates General was elected by the body of active citizens and renamed the National Assembly.
New hymns were composed, oaths taken and martyrs commemorated, all in the name of the nation.
A centralised administrative system was put in place and it formulated uniform laws for all citizens within its territory.
Internal customs duties and dues were abolished and a uniform system of weights and measures was adopted.
Regional dialects were discouraged and French, as it was spoken and written in Paris, became the common language of the nation.
The revolutionaries further declared that it was the mission and the destiny of the French nation to liberate the peoples of Europe from despotism, in other words to help other peoples of Europe to become nations.
When the news of the events in France reached the different cities of Europe, students and other members of educated middle classes began setting up Jacobin clubs.
Their activities and campaigns prepared the way for the French armies which moved into Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and much of Italy in the 1790s.
With the outbreak of the revolutionary wars, the French armies began to carry the idea of nationalism abroad.
Within the wide swathe of territory that came under his control, Napoleon set about introducing many of the reforms that he had already introduced in France.
Through a return to monarchy Napoleon had, no doubt, destroyed democracy in France, but in the administrative field he had incorporated revolutionary principles in order to make the whole system more rational and efficient.
The Civil Code of 1804 – usually known as the Napoleonic Code – did away with all privileges based on birth, established equality before the law and secured the right to property.
This Code was exported to the regions under French control.
In the Dutch Republic, in Switzerland, in Italy and Germany, Napoleon simplified administrative divisions, abolished the feudal system and freed peasants from serfdom and manorial dues.
In the towns too, guild restrictions were removed.
Transport and communication systems were improved.
Peasants, artisans, workers and new businessmen enjoyed a new-found freedom.
Businessmen and small-scale producers of goods, in particular, began to realise that uniform laws, standardised weights and measures, and a common national currency would facilitate the movement and exchange of goods and capital from one region to another.
However, in the areas conquered, the reactions of the local populations to French rule were mixed.
Initially, in many places such as Holland and Switzerland, as well as in certain cities like Brussels, Mainz, Milan and Warsaw, the French armies were welcomed as harbingers of liberty.
But the initial enthusiasm soon turned to hostility, as it became clear that the new administrative arrangements did not go hand in hand with political freedom.
Increased taxation, censorship, forced conscription into the French armies required to conquer the rest of Europe, all seemed to outweigh the advantages of the administrative changes.
The Making of Nationalism in Europe
If you look at the map of mid-eighteenth-century Europe you will find that there were no ‘nation-states’ as we know them today.
What we know today as Germany, Italy and Switzerland were divided into kingdoms, duchies and cantons whose rulers had their autonomous territories.
Eastern and Central Europe were under autocratic monarchies within the territories of which lived diverse peoples.
They did not see themselves as sharing a collective identity or a common culture.
Often, they even spoke different languages and belonged to different ethnic groups.
The Habsburg Empire that ruled over Austria-Hungary, for example, was a patchwork of many different regions and peoples.
It included the Alpine regions – the Tyrol, Austria and the Sudetenland – as well as Bohemia, where the aristocracy was predominantly German-speaking.
It also included the Italian-speaking provinces of Lombardy and Venetia.
In Hungary, half of the population spoke Magyar while the other half spoke a variety of dialects.
In Galicia, the aristocracy spoke Polish.
Besides these three dominant groups, there also lived within the boundaries of the empire, a mass of subject peasant peoples – Bohemians and Slovaks to the north, Slovenes in Carniola, Croats to the south, and Roumans to the east in Transylvania.
Such differences did not easily promote a sense of political unity.
The only tie binding these diverse groups together was a common allegiance to the emperor.
The Aristocracy and the New Middle Class
Socially and politically, a landed aristocracy was the dominant class on the continent.
The members of this class were united by a common way of life that cut across regional divisions.
They owned estates in the countryside and also town-houses.
They spoke French for purposes of diplomacy and in high society.
Their families were often connected by ties of marriage.
This powerful aristocracy was, however, numerically a small group.
The majority of the population was made up of the peasantry.
To the west, the bulk of the land was farmed by tenants and small owners, while in Eastern and Central Europe the pattern of landholding was characterised by vast estates which were cultivated by serfs.
In Western and parts of Central Europe the growth of industrial production and trade meant the growth of towns and the emergence of commercial classes whose existence was based on production for the market.
Industrialisation began in England in the second half of the eighteenth century, but in France and parts of the German states it occurred only during the nineteenth century.
In its wake, new social groups came into being: a working-class population, and middle classes made up of industrialists, businessmen, professionals.
In Central and Eastern Europe these groups were smaller in number till late nineteenth century.
It was among the educated, liberal middle classes that ideas of national unity following the abolition of aristocratic privileges gained popularity.
What did Liberal Nationalism Stand for?
Ideas of national unity in early-nineteenth-century Europe were closely allied to the ideology of liberalism.
The term ‘liberalism’ derives from the Latin root liber, meaning free.
For the new middle classes liberalism stood for freedom for the individual and equality of all before the law.
Politically, it emphasised the concept of government by consent.
Since the French Revolution, liberalism had stood for the end of autocracy and clerical privileges, a constitution and representative government through parliament.
Nineteenth-century liberals also stressed the inviolability of private property.
Yet, equality before the law did not necessarily stand for universal suffrage.
You will recall that in revolutionary France, which marked the first political experiment in liberal democracy, the right to vote and to get elected was granted exclusively to property-owning men.
Men without property and all women were excluded from political rights.
Only for a brief period under the Jacobins did all adult males enjoy suffrage.
However, the Napoleonic Code went back to limited suffrage and reduced women to the status of a minor, subject to the authority of fathers and husbands.
Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries women and non-propertied men organised opposition movements demanding equal political rights.
In the economic sphere, liberalism stood for the freedom of markets and the abolition of state-imposed restrictions on the movement of goods and capital.
During the nineteenth century this was a strong demand of the emerging middle classes.
Let us take the example of the German-speaking regions in the first half of the nineteenth century.
Napoleon’s administrative measures had created out of countless small principalities a confederation of 39 states.
Each of these possessed its own currency, and weights and measures.
A merchant travelling in 1833 from Hamburg to Nuremberg to sell his goods would have had to pass through 11 customs barriers and pay a customs duty of about 5 per cent at each one of them.
Duties were often levied according to the weight or measurement of the goods.
As each region had its own system of weights and measures, this involved time-consuming calculation.
The measure of cloth, for example, was the elle which in each region stood for a different length.
An elle of textile material bought in Frankfurt would get you 54.7 cm of cloth, in Mainz 55.1 cm, in Nuremberg 65.6 cm, in Freiburg 53.5 cm.
Such conditions were viewed as obstacles to economic exchange and growth by the new commercial classes, who argued for the creation of a unified economic territory allowing the unhindered movement of goods, people and capital.
In 1834, a customs union or zollverein was formed at the initiative of Prussia and joined by most of the German states.
The union abolished tariff barriers and reduced the number of currencies from over thirty to two.
The creation of a network of railways further stimulated mobility, harnessing economic interests to national unification.
A wave of economic nationalism strengthened the wider nationalist sentiments growing at the time.
A New Conservatism after 1815
Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, European governments were driven by a spirit of conservatism.
Conservatives believed that established, traditional institutions of state and society – like the monarchy, the Church, social hierarchies, property and the family – should be preserved.
Most conservatives, however, did not propose a return to the society of pre-revolutionary days.
Rather, they realised, from the changes initiated by Napoleon, that modernisation could in fact strengthen traditional institutions like the monarchy.
It could make state power more effective and strong.
A modern army, an efficient bureaucracy, a dynamic economy, the abolition of feudalism and serfdom could strengthen the autocratic monarchies of Europe.
In 1815, representatives of the European powers – Britain, Russia, Prussia and Austria – who had collectively defeated Napoleon, met at Vienna to draw up a settlement for Europe.
The Congress was hosted by the Austrian Chancellor Duke Metternich.
The delegates drew up the Treaty of Vienna of 1815 with the object of undoing most of the changes that had come about in Europe during the Napoleonic wars.
The Bourbon dynasty, which had been deposed during the French Revolution, was restored to power, and France lost the territories it had annexed under Napoleon.
A series of states were set up on the boundaries of France to prevent French expansion in future.
Thus the kingdom of the Netherlands, which included Belgium, was set up in the north and Genoa was added to Piedmont in the south.
Prussia was given important new territories on its western frontiers, while Austria was given control of northern Italy.
But the German confederation of 39 states that had been set up by Napoleon was left untouched.
In the east, Russia was given part of Poland while Prussia was given a portion of Saxony.
The main intention was to restore the monarchies that had been overthrown by Napoleon, and create a new conservative order in Europe.
Conservative regimes set up in 1815 were autocratic.
They did not tolerate criticism and dissent, and sought to curb activities that questioned the legitimacy of autocratic governments.
Most of them imposed censorship laws to control what was said in newspapers, books, plays and songs and reflected the ideas of liberty and freedom associated with the French Revolution.
The memory of the French Revolution nonetheless continued to inspire liberals.
One of the major issues taken up by the liberal-nationalists, who criticised the new conservative order, was freedom of the press.
The Revolutionaries
During the years following 1815, the fear of repression drove many liberal-nationalists underground.
Secret societies sprang up in many European states to train revolutionaries and spread their ideas.
To be revolutionary at this time meant a commitment to oppose monarchical forms that had been established after the Vienna Congress, and to fight for liberty and freedom.
Most of these revolutionaries also saw the creation of nation-states as a necessary part of this struggle for freedom.
One such individual was the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Mazzini.
Born in Genoa in 1807, he became a member of the secret society of the Carbonari.
As a young man of 24, he was sent into exile in 1831 for attempting a revolution in Liguria.
He subsequently founded two more underground societies, first, Young Italy in Marseilles, and then, Young Europe in Berne, whose members were like-minded young men from Poland, France, Italy and the German states.
Mazzini believed that God had intended nations to be the natural units of mankind.
So Italy could not continue to be a patchwork of small states and kingdoms.
It had to be forged into a single unified republic within a wider alliance of nations.
This unification alone could be the basis of Italian liberty.
Following his model, secret societies were set up in Germany, France, Switzerland and Poland.
Mazzini’s relentless opposition to monarchy and his vision of democratic republics frightened the conservatives.
Metternich described him as ‘the most dangerous enemy of our social order’.
The Age of Revolutions: 1830-1848
As conservative regimes tried to consolidate their power, liberalism and nationalism came to be increasingly associated with revolution in many regions of Europe such as the Italian and German states, the provinces of the Ottoman Empire, Ireland and Poland.
These revolutions were led by the liberal-nationalists belonging to the educated middle-class elite, among whom were professors, school- teachers, clerks and members of the commercial middle classes.
The first upheaval took place in France in July 1830.
The Bourbon kings who had been restored to power during the conservative reaction after 1815, were now overthrown by liberal revolutionaries who installed a constitutional monarchy with Louis Philippe at its head.
‘When France sneezes,’ Metternich once remarked, ‘the rest of Europe catches cold.’ The July Revolution sparked an uprising in Brussels which led to Belgium breaking away from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands.
An event that mobilised nationalist feelings among the educated elite across Europe was the Greek war of independence.
Greece had been part of the Ottoman Empire since the fifteenth century.
The growth of revolutionary nationalism in Europe sparked off a struggle for independence amongst the Greeks which began in 1821.
Nationalists in Greece got support from other Greeks living in exile and also from many West Europeans who had sympathies for ancient Greek culture.
Poets and artists lauded Greece as the cradle of European civilisation and mobilised public opinion to support its struggle against a Muslim empire.
The English poet Lord Byron organised funds and later went to fight in the war, where he died of fever in 1824.
Finally, the Treaty of Constantinople of 1832 recognised Greece as an independent nation.
The Romantic Imagination and National Feeling
The development of nationalism did not come about only through wars and territorial expansion.
Culture played an important role in creating the idea of the nation: art and poetry, stories and music helped express and shape nationalist feelings.
Let us look at Romanticism, a cultural movement which sought to develop a particular form of nationalist sentiment.
Romantic artists and poets generally criticised the glorification of reason and science and focused instead on emotions, intuition and mystical feelings.
Their effort was to create a sense of a shared collective heritage, a common cultural past, as the basis of a nation.
Other Romantics such as the German philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) claimed that true German culture was to be discovered among the common people – das volk.
It was through folk songs, folk poetry and folk dances that the true spirit of the nation (volksgeist) was popularised.
So collecting and recording these forms of folk culture was essential to the project of nation-building.
The emphasis on vernacular language and the collection of local folklore was not just to recover an ancient national spirit, but also to carry the modern nationalist message to large audiences who were mostly illiterate.
This was especially so in the case of Poland, which had been partitioned at the end of the eighteenth century by the Great Powers – Russia, Prussia and Austria.
Even though Poland no longer existed as an independent territory, national feelings were kept alive through music and language.
Karol Kurpinski, for example, celebrated the national struggle through his operas and music, turning folk dances like the polonaise and mazurka into nationalist symbols.
Language too played an important role in developing nationalist sentiments.
After Russian occupation, the Polish language was forced out of schools and the Russian language was imposed everywhere.
In 1831, an armed rebellion against Russian rule took place which was ultimately crushed.
Following this, many members of the clergy in Poland began to use language as a weapon of national resistance.
Polish was used for Church gatherings and all religious instruction.
As a result, a large number of priests and bishops were put in jail or sent to Siberia by the Russian authorities as punishment for their refusal to preach in Russian.
The use of Polish came to be seen as a symbol of the struggle against Russian dominance.
Hunger, Hardship and Popular Revolt
The 1830s were years of great economic hardship in Europe.
The first half of the nineteenth century saw an enormous increase in population all over Europe.
In most countries there were more seekers of jobs than employment.
Population from rural areas migrated to the cities to live in overcrowded slums.
Small producers in towns were often faced with stiff competition from imports of cheap machine-made goods from England, where industrialisation was more advanced than on the continent.
This was especially so in textile production, which was carried out mainly in homes or small workshops and was only partly mechanised.
In those regions of Europe where the aristocracy still enjoyed power, peasants struggled under the burden of feudal dues and obligations.
The rise of food prices or a year of bad harvest led to widespread pauperism in town and country.
The year 1848 was one such year.
Food shortages and widespread unemployment brought the population of Paris out on the roads.
Barricades were erected and Louis Philippe was forced to flee.
A National Assembly proclaimed a Republic, granted suffrage to all adult males above 21, and guaranteed the right to work.
National workshops to provide employment were set up.
Earlier, in 1845, weavers in Silesia had led a revolt against contractors who supplied them raw material and gave them orders for finished textiles but drastically reduced their payments.
The journalist Wilhelm Wolff described the events in a Silesian village as follows:
In these villages (with 18,000 inhabitants) cotton weaving is the most widespread occupation ...
The misery of the workers is extreme.
The desperate need for jobs has been taken advantage of by the contractors to reduce the prices of the goods they order ... On 4 June at 2 p.m. a large crowd of weavers emerged from their homes and marched in pairs up to the mansion of their contractor demanding higher wages.
They were treated with scorn and threats alternately.
Following this, a group of them forced their way into the house, smashed its elegant window- panes, furniture, porcelain ... another group broke into the storehouse and plundered it of supplies of cloth which they tore to shreds ...
The contractor fled with his family to a neighbouring village which, however, refused to shelter such a person.
He returned 24 hours later having requisitioned the army.
In the exchange that followed, eleven weavers were shot.
1848: The Revolution of the Liberals
Parallel to the revolts of the poor, unemployed and starving peasants and workers in many European countries in the year 1848, a revolution led by the educated middle classes was under way.
Events of February 1848 in France had brought about the abdication of the monarch and a republic based on universal male suffrage had been proclaimed.
In other parts of Europe where independent nation-states did not yet exist – such as Germany, Italy, Poland, the Austro-Hungarian Empire – men and women of the liberal middle classes combined their demands for constitutionalism with national unification.
They took advantage of the growing popular unrest to push their demands for the creation of a nation-state on parliamentary principles – a constitution, freedom of the press and freedom of association.
In the German regions a large number of political associations whose members were middle-class professionals, businessmen and prosperous artisans came together in the city of Frankfurt and decided to vote for an all-German National Assembly.
On 18 May 1848, 831 elected representatives marched in a festive procession to take their places in the Frankfurt parliament convened in the Church of St Paul.
They drafted a constitution for a German nation to be headed by a monarchy subject to a parliament.
When the deputies offered the crown on these terms to Friedrich Wilhelm IV, King of Prussia, he rejected it and joined other monarchs to oppose the elected assembly.
While the opposition of the aristocracy and military became stronger, the social basis of parliament eroded.
The parliament was dominated by the middle classes who resisted the demands of workers and artisans and consequently lost their support.
In the end troops were called in and the assembly was forced to disband.
The issue of extending political rights to women was a controversial one within the liberal movement, in which large numbers of women had participated actively over the years.
Women had formed their own political associations, founded newspapers and taken part in political meetings and demonstrations.
Despite this they were denied suffrage rights during the election of the Assembly.
When the Frankfurt parliament convened in the Church of St Paul, women were admitted only as observers to stand in the visitors’ gallery.
Though conservative forces were able to suppress liberal movements in 1848, they could not restore the old order.
Monarchs were beginning to realise that the cycles of revolution and repression could only be ended by granting concessions to the liberal-nationalist revolutionaries.
Hence, in the years after 1848, the autocratic monarchies of Central and Eastern Europe began to introduce the changes that had already taken place in Western Europe before 1815.
Thus serfdom and bonded labour were abolished both in the Habsburg dominions and in Russia.
The Habsburg rulers granted more autonomy to the Hungarians in 1867.
The Making of Germany and Italy
Germany – Can the Army be the Architect of a Nation?
After 1848, nationalism in Europe moved away from its association with democracy and revolution.
Nationalist sentiments were often mobilised by conservatives for promoting state power and achieving political domination over Europe.
This can be observed in the process by which Germany and Italy came to be unified as nation-states.
As you have seen, nationalist feelings were widespread among middle-class Germans, who in 1848 tried to unite the different regions of the German confederation into a nation-state governed by an elected parliament.
This liberal initiative to nation-building was, however, repressed by the combined forces of the monarchy and the military, supported by the large landowners (called Junkers) of Prussia.
From then on, Prussia took on the leadership of the movement for national unification.
Its chief minister, Otto von Bismarck, was the architect of this process carried out with the help of the Prussian army and bureaucracy.
Three wars over seven years – with Austria, Denmark and France – ended in Prussian victory and completed the process of unification.
In January 1871, the Prussian king, William I, was proclaimed German Emperor in a ceremony held at Versailles.
On the bitterly cold morning of 18 January 1871, an assembly comprising the princes of the German states, representatives of the army, important Prussian ministers including the chief minister Otto von Bismarck gathered in the unheated Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles to proclaim the new German Empire headed by Kaiser William I of Prussia.
The nation-building process in Germany had demonstrated the dominance of Prussian state power.
The new state placed a strong emphasis on modernising the currency, banking, legal and judicial systems in Germany.
Prussian measures and practices often became a model for the rest of Germany.
Italy Unified
Like Germany, Italy too had a long history of political fragmentation.
Italians were scattered over several dynastic states as well as the multi-national Habsburg Empire.
During the middle of the nineteenth century, Italy was divided into seven states, of which only one, Sardinia-Piedmont, was ruled by an Italian princely house.
The north was under Austrian Habsburgs, the centre was ruled by the Pope and the southern regions were under the domination of the Bourbon kings of Spain.
Even the Italian language had not acquired one common form and still had many regional and local variations.
During the 1830s, Giuseppe Mazzini had sought to put together a coherent programme for a unitary Italian Republic.
He had also formed a secret society called Young Italy for the dissemination of his goals.
The failure of revolutionary uprisings both in 1831 and 1848 meant that the mantle now fell on Sardinia-Piedmont under its ruler King Victor Emmanuel II to unify the Italian states through war.
In the eyes of the ruling elites of this region, a unified Italy offered them the possibility of economic development and political dominance.
Chief Minister Cavour who led the movement to unify the regions of Italy was neither a revolutionary nor a democrat.
Like many other wealthy and educated members of the Italian elite, he spoke French much better than he did Italian.
Through a tactful diplomatic alliance with France engineered by Cavour, Sardinia-Piedmont succeeded in defeating the Austrian forces in 1859.
Apart from regular troops, a large number of armed volunteers under the leadership of Giuseppe Garibaldi joined the fray.
In 1860, they marched into South Italy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and succeeded in winning the support of the local peasants in order to drive out the Spanish rulers.
In 1861 Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of united Italy.
However, much of the Italian population, among whom rates of illiteracy were very high, remained blissfully unaware of liberal- nationalist ideology.
The peasant masses who had supported Garibaldi in southern Italy had never heard of Italia, and believed that ‘La Talia’ was Victor Emmanuel’s wife!
The Strange Case of Britain
The model of the nation or the nation-state, some scholars have argued, is Great Britain.
In Britain the formation of the nation-state 21was not the result of a sudden upheaval or revolution.
It was the result of a long-drawn-out process.
There was no British nation prior to the eighteenth century.
The primary identities of the people who inhabited the British Isles were ethnic ones – such as English, Welsh, Scot or Irish.
All of these ethnic groups had their own cultural and political traditions.
But as the English nation steadily grew in wealth, importance and power, it was able to extend its influence over the other nations of the islands.
The English parliament, which had seized power from the monarchy in 1688 at the end of a protracted conflict, was the instrument through which a nation-state, with England at its centre, came to be forged.
The Act of Union (1707) between England and Scotland that resulted in the formation of the ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain’ meant, in effect, that England was able to impose its influence on Scotland.
The British parliament was henceforth dominated by its English members.
The growth of a British identity meant that Scotland’s distinctive culture and political institutions were systematically suppressed.
The Catholic clans that inhabited the Scottish Highlands suffered terrible repression whenever they attempted to assert their independence.
The Scottish Highlanders were forbidden to speak their Gaelic language or wear their national dress, and large numbers were forcibly driven out of their homeland.
Ireland suffered a similar fate.
It was a country deeply divided between Catholics and Protestants.
The English helped the Protestants of Ireland to establish their dominance over a largely Catholic country.
Catholic revolts against British dominance were suppressed.
After a failed revolt led by Wolfe Tone and his United Irishmen (1798), Ireland was forcibly incorporated into the United Kingdom in 1801.
A new ‘British nation’ was forged through the propagation of a dominant English culture.
The symbols of the new Britain – the British flag (Union Jack), the national anthem (God Save Our Noble King), the English language – were actively promoted and the older nations survived only as subordinate partners in this union.
Visualising the Nation
While it is easy enough to represent a ruler through a portrait or a statue, how does one go about giving a face to a nation?
Artists in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries found a way out by personifying a nation.
In other words they represented a country as if it were a person.
Nations were then portrayed as female figures.
The female form that was chosen to personify the nation did not stand for any particular woman in real life; rather it sought to give the abstract idea of the nation a concrete form.
That is, the female figure became an allegory of the nation.
You will recall that during the French Revolution artists used the female allegory to portray ideas such as Liberty, Justice and the Republic.
These ideals were represented through specific objects or symbols.
As you would remember, the attributes of Liberty are the red cap, or the broken chain, while Justice is generally a blindfolded woman carrying a pair of weighing scales.
Similar female allegories were invented by artists in the nineteenth century to represent the nation.
In France she was christened Marianne, a popular Christian name, which underlined the idea of a people’s nation.
Her characteristics were drawn from those of Liberty and the Republic – the red cap, the tricolour, the cockade.
Statues of Marianne were erected in public squares to remind the public of the national symbol of unity and to persuade them to identify with it.
Marianne images were marked on coins and stamps.
Similarly, Germania became the allegory of the German nation.
In visual representations, Germania wears a crown of oak leaves, as the German oak stands for heroism.
Nationalism and Imperialism
By the last quarter of the nineteenth century nationalism no longer retained its idealistic liberal-democratic sentiment of the first half of the century, but became a narrow creed with limited ends.
During this period nationalist groups became increasingly intolerant of each other and ever ready to go to war.
The major European powers, in turn, manipulated the nationalist aspirations of the subject peoples in Europe to further their own imperialist aims.
The most serious source of nationalist tension in Europe after 1871 was the area called the Balkans.
The Balkans was a region of geographical and ethnic variation comprising modern-day Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Slovenia, Serbia and Montenegro whose inhabitants were broadly known as the Slavs.
A large part of the Balkans was under the control of the Ottoman Empire.
The spread of the ideas of romantic nationalism in the Balkans together with the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire made this region very explosive.
All through the nineteenth century the Ottoman Empire had sought to strengthen itself through modernisation and internal reforms but with very little success.
One by one, its European subject nationalities broke away from its control and declared independence.
The Balkan peoples based their claims for independence or political rights on nationality and used history to prove that they had once been independent but had subsequently been subjugated by foreign powers.
Hence the rebellious nationalities in the Balkans thought of their struggles as attempts to win back their long-lost independence.
As the different Slavic nationalities struggled to define their identity and independence, the Balkan area became an area of intense conflict.
The Balkan states were fiercely jealous of each other and each hoped to gain more territory at the expense of the others.
Matters were further complicated because the Balkans also became the scene of big power rivalry.
During this period, there was intense rivalry among the European powers over trade and colonies as well as naval and military might.
These rivalries were very evident in the way the Balkan problem unfolded.
Each power – Russia, Germany, England, Austro-Hungary – was keen on countering the hold of other powers over the Balkans, and extending its own control over the area.
This led to a series of wars in the region and finally the First World War.
Nationalism, aligned with imperialism, led Europe to disaster in 1914.
But meanwhile, many countries in the world which had been colonised by the European powers in the nineteenth century began to oppose imperial domination.
The anti-imperial movements that developed everywhere were nationalist, in the sense that they all struggled to form independent nation-states, and were inspired by a sense of collective national unity, forged in confrontation with imperialism.
European ideas of nationalism were nowhere replicated, for people everywhere developed their own specific variety of nationalism.
But the idea that societies should be organised into ‘nation-states’ came to be accepted as natural and universal.
